2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Round 4



(MS) Science Bee Round 4
Regulation Tossups
(1)     Edsger Dijkstra's [[DEEK-struhs]] backtracking algorithm involves the arrangement
of agents on one of these objects. A program called Stockfish has been applied to analyze
agents on one of these objects. This object, which can be traversed using only L-shaped
jumps, is the subject of a discrete mathematics problem about arranging eight of a certain
piece such that they do not attack each other. For the point, name this eight-by-eight board,
the subject of the eight queens puzzle.

ANSWER: Chessboard (accept Checkerboard)

(2)    These reactions are the subject of Marcus theory. This type of reaction occurs in
galvanic cells, which are used to power batteries. The Nernst equation quantitatively
expresses the outcome of this type of reaction. The mnemonic OILRIG is commonly used to
remember the flow of electrons in this type of reaction. For the point, what type of reaction
involves the loss and gain of electrons?

ANSWER: Redox reaction (or Reduction-oxidation reaction; prompt on descriptive
answers)

(3)    This fundamental force’s mediating particles can be described by the Gell-Mann
matrices. Hideki Yukawa proposed that this force existed due to the pion. This force binds
quarks together to form hadrons, and it also keeps hadrons together in atomic nuclei. For
the point, name this fundamental force responsible for keeping protons and neutrons
together in the nucleus.

ANSWER: Strong Force (or Strong Nuclear Force; accept Strong Interaction)

(4)     The first of these objects was discovered by Giuseppe Piazzi and named after the
Roman goddess of agriculture. Other examples of these objects were named after Hawaiian,
Inuit, and Rapa Nui deities. The term for these objects was coined by Alan Stern, though the
International Astronomical Union rejects the implication that the objects qualify as certain
larger bodies. For the point, name this type of object, whose most famous member was
demoted to its ranks in 2006.

ANSWER: Dwarf Planet (do not accept or prompt on "Red Dwarf" or "White Dwarf")

(5)     This region was first conceptualized by A.E.H. Love and was further defined in
Reginald Aldworth Daly’s “Strength and Structure of the Earth.” The boundary between this
layer and what lies beneath it is often determined by the rheological differences between
this layer and the asthenosphere. For the point, name this outermost layer, or "shell," of a
terrestrial planet, composed predominantly of the crust and upper mantle.

ANSWER: Lithosphere (prompt on "crust" or "mantle")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 4


(6)    The cell walls of these organisms contain pseudomurein, which cannot be degraded
by lysozyme. Methanogens are a class of these organisms found in the digestive tracts of
ruminants. The proposed kingdom of Monera included both bacteria and these organisms,
which can be further classified as acidophiles, halophiles, and thermophiles. For the point,
name this domain of prokaryotes that often inhabit extreme environments.

ANSWER: Archaea (accept Archaebacteria; prompt on "extremophiles"; do not accept or
prompt on "bacteria")

(7)      The Kozak and Shine Dalgarno sequences are important for initiating this process in
eukaryotes and prokaryotes respectively. Molecules bind to the A, P, E sites of an organelle
in this process, which begins with the recognition of the start codon AUG or methionine.
Initiation, elongation, and termination are the three steps of, for the point, what process in
which ribosomes synthesize a protein from an mRNA sequence?

ANSWER: Translation

(8)     One type of this quantity is calculated with the bolometric correction. This quantity
changes regularly for Cepheid variables, and it is plotted on the y-axis of a Hertzprung-
Russell diagram. This quantity is 4.83 for the Sun, and the large star Vega has a value of
0.582 for this quantity. An “apparent” counterpart is contrasted with, for the point, what
measure of an object’s luminosity?

ANSWER: Absolute Magnitude (accept Absolute Visual Magnitude; prompt on
“Magnitude;” prompt on “Luminosity;” prompt on “Brightness”)

(9)     Ramsey's theorem explains that at a party with this many people, it is guaranteed
that at least three of the guests either know or don't know each other. This number is the
order of the smallest non-abelian group and appears in the denominator of the solution to
the Basel problem. This is the smallest perfect number, and also the number of possible
handshakes among 4 people. 3 factorial is equal to, for the point, what number that gives
the number of sides in a hexagon?

ANSWER: Six

(10) Wind forces lead these entities to move at a 90-degree angle from the direction of
the surface wind in Ekman transport, and the Coriolis effect plays a large role in developing
the "surface" variety of these entities. "Deep" varieties of these entities are driven by
thermohaline circulation. Gyres are rotating examples of these entities, which include the
Gulf Stream. For the point, name these large flows of water in the ocean.

ANSWER: Ocean Currents (accept Gyres before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 4


(11) These particles are released as part of the cooling operation of white dwarfs and
neutron stars in the urca process. Unlike their antiparticle, these particles have left-handed
chirality, as well as a neutron and positron. These particles are emitted during beta decay,
and these fermions come in flavors that corresponds to leptons such as the electron, muon,
and tau. For the point, name these nearly massless particles that interact via the weak force.

ANSWER: Neutrino

(12) This hormone is synthesized by removing C-peptide by PC1 and PC2. This hormone,
which regulates GLUT4 transporters, was sequenced by Frederick Sanger. Ketoacidosis is
caused by a lack of this hormone, which stimulates the production of glycogen. Secreted
from beta cells in the Islets of Langerhans, this is, for the point, what hormone that opposes
the effects of glucagon, whose deficiency leads to type 1 diabetes?

ANSWER: Insulin

(13) A matrix's eigenvalues can be calculated using the "characteristic" type of these
mathematical objects. The Abel-Ruffini theorem says it is impossible to find algebraic
solutions to these objects when their degree is greater than four. The power rule can be
used to differentiate these objects, which can be divided using synthetic division. For the
point, name these functions consisting of sums of the powers of variables.

ANSWER: Polynomials

(14) The Clausius inequality relates this quantity to heat and temperature. Trouton’s rule
states that this value for liquids undergoing vaporization is fairly constant. By the second
law of thermodynamics, this quantity in an isolated system must increase through
spontaneous evolution to reach thermodynamic equilibrium. Changes in this quantity are
denoted S. For the point, name this quantity, the measure of disorder in a system.

ANSWER: Entropy (accept S before mentioned; prompt on "chaos" or "disorder")

(15) Extractions of the Burmese variety of this substance have been in high demand,
although its sale has caused controversy for helping fund the internal conflict in Myanmar.
In 2020, scientists were able to extract ancient DNA from this substance, which stabilized
the organisms inside, although the extraction of dinosaur blood from this substance is not
as feasible as seen in the film Jurassic Park. Insects are commonly preserved in, for the
point, what yellow-orange resin that comes from fossilized trees?

ANSWER: Amber (accept Burmese Amber; accept Resinite; prompt on “Resin” before
mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 4


(16) The term 'syllable' was once used in place of this modern unit of measurement.
Conflicts have arisen over whether the binary or decimal system should be used for this unit
of measurement. The most common type of this unit is referred to by the Internet Protocol
as an octet. For the point, name this unit of measurement for data size most commonly
consisting of eight bits and expressed in kilo, mega and giga variants.

ANSWER: Bytes (accept kilobyte; accept megabyte; accept gigabyte; accept terabyte;
accept petabyte)

(17) Anvil cells that use this mineral enable the compression of small materials to
extreme pressures. Kimberlite pipes are often used to mine this mineral, which is placed at
the tip of an apparatus in the Vickers test. This material, which is ranked above corundum
on the Mohs scale, is a carbon allotrope consisting of a tetrahedrally bonded covalent
network lattice. For the point, name this precious mineral, the hardest naturally occurring
material.

ANSWER: Diamond

(18) Individuals with the Delta-32 mutation are resistant to infection by this pathogen
due to the inactivation of the protein C-C chemokine receptor 5. This pathogen can be
treated by antiretroviral drugs such as Abacavir and AZT. Helper T cells, macrophages, and
dendritic cells, are attacked by, for the point, what sexually-transmitted retrovirus that
leads to a weakened immune response and can cause AIDS?

ANSWER: HIV (or Human Immunodeficiency Virus; accept HIV-AIDS; do not accept or
prompt on "AIDS" alone)

(19) Animals possess a reflective layer called the tapetum lucidum, which is in the organ
that allows them to have this ability. Although humans cannot perform this ability, they are
able experience it with a virtual reality device called the Tarsier Eclipse. An increased
amount of high-density rod cells in the eyes allow animals to perform, for the point, what
ability possessed by most nocturnal animals, such as owls, that allows them to see in the
dark?

ANSWER: Night Vision (accept the description see in the dark or equivalents before
mentioned)

(20) This planet is the closest to Earth whose orbit is not predicted by the Titius-Bode
law. Objects that are in 1:2 orbital resonance with this planet are called “twotinos.” A
triangular patch of clouds on this planet is known as the “Scooter,” and a former series of
storms on it was called the Great Dark Spot. A moon of this planet is the largest in the solar
system to exhibit retrograde orbit, Triton. For the point, name this farthest planet from the
sun.

ANSWER: Neptune
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 4


(21) Optical tweezers use two of these devices to hold together microscopic objects. One
of these devices was used to cool rubidium atoms into the first Bose-Einstein condensate. In
the three-level type of these devices, pumping is used to energize the gain medium until it
reaches a state of population inversion. Stimulated emission produces a coherent beam of
very focused light in, for the point, what devices often found in barcode scanners and
printers?

ANSWER: Lasers (accept Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation)

(22) This quantity can be found by taking the square root of the product of vacuum
permittivity and vacuum permeability. This quantity was shown to be the same in both
directions in the Michelson-Morley experiment, disproving the existence of “aether wind.”
According to special relativity, this quantity is the same in all inertial reference frames. For
the point, name this quantity symbolized c, the maximum speed at which matter in the
universe can travel.

ANSWER: Speed of Light (accept c until mentioned)

(23) These events can be detected by the presence of a "hook echo" pattern on a Doppler
Radar. These events, examples of which include the landspout and waterspout varieties, and
their intensity is measured by the TORRO and Fujita scales. A namesake "Alley" in the
Central United States depicts, for the point, what meteorological events characterized by a
violent funnel-shaped rotating cloud of air?

ANSWER: Tornadoes (accept Tornado Alley; prompt on "Landspout" or "Waterspout"
before mentioned)

(24) The age of these type of markings found on the White Sands Desert in 2021 were
approximated by radiocarbon-dating the seeds of ditchgrass. These markings, which are
excavated by paleontologists through the process of lithification, were discovered by a team
led by Mary Leakey in Laetoli and likely belonged to the Australopithecus afarensis species,
providing evidence of bipedalism in early hominins. For the point, name these impressions
that are left on a surface when a human or animal takes a step?

ANSWER: Footprints (accept Laetoli Footprints; prompt on “Prints” or “Tracks”)

(25) This scientist dropped out of the University of Pisa, but later returned and was
named chief mathematician. This author of The Assayer utilized the telescope to discover
that the moon had craters and mountains, which was contrary to contemporary belief that
the moon's surface was smooth. For the point, name this Italian astronomer that was put
under house arrest by the Catholic Church for his belief in heliocentricism.

ANSWER: Galileo Galilei (accept either)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Round 4


(26) This element has the highest ionization energy in the periodic table. Deuterium
fuses with tritium to give an isotope of this element. Neon and this noble gas are found in a
specific type of laser. The nucleus of an atom of this element is equivalent to an alpha
particle, which has two protons and two neutrons. For the point, two hydrogen atoms can
combine to form what noble gas, the second lightest and second most abundant element in
the universe?

ANSWER: Helium

(27) Foster’s rule explains the population of animals in these ecosystems. Two oceanic
plates colliding at a convergent boundary forms these landforms. The most famous example
of adaptive radiation occurs in these ecosystems, which Charles Darwin investigated finches
in. For the point, name these landforms surrounded completely by water, examples of which
include Galapagos.

ANSWER: Islands (accept Island arc; accept Galapagos Islands)

(28) This element’s color is explained by relativistic effects of its 5d orbitals. It’s not
platinum, but a combination of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid is used to dissolve this
metal. A foil of this element allowed Ernest Rutherford to discover the nucleus in a
namesake experiment. Electrum is the alloy of silver and, for the point, what precious
elemental metal whose purity is measured in karats?

ANSWER: Gold (accept Au)

(29) A distinguishing feature of this disease is the presence of a polybasic site cleaved by
furin that helps enhance its virulence. Methods for detecting this disease involve the use of
lateral flow strips, the RT-LAMP method, or a real-time reverse transcription PCR reaction.
The first confirmed case of this disease occurred in Wuhan and resulted in widespread
lockdowns in China. Delta and Omicron are variants of, for the point, what infectious disease
that has caused the ongoing pandemic?

ANSWER: COVID-19 (accept SARS‑CoV‑2; accept Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2; accept Coronavirus; prompt on "Corona")

(30) An EEG can measure stages one through four of this process, during which K-
complexes occur. A disease commonly named for this process is known medically as
trypanosomiasis [["trip"-ah-noh-SOH-mye-AY-sis]]. Muscle paralysis often occurs during
the rapid eye movement form of this process, and obstruction of breathing can lead to its
namesake apnea. People with insomnia struggle to undergo, for the point, what process
which can include dreaming?

ANSWER: Sleep (accept REM Sleep; accept African Sleeping Sickness)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                    Round 4


Extra Questions
(1)     Fibroids are smooth muscle tumors found in this organ, whose inner lining grows in
the wrong location during endometriosis. A hysterectomy is the surgical removal of this
internal organ, which is also cut open during a Caesarean section. The placenta forms within
this organ after the embryo implants into its wall at the start of gestation. For the point,
name this reproductive organ where the fetus develops.

ANSWER: uterus (or womb)

(2)     Diels-Alder reactions are accelerated when this molecule is used as the solvent. The
enzyme catalase breaks down its substrate into oxygen and this compound. Combustion
reactions produce carbon dioxide and the gaseous form of this compound. Carbon dioxide
and this compound are the inputs into photosynthesis. For the point, name this “universal
solvent” with chemical formula H2O.

ANSWER: Water (or dihydrogen monoxide; accept H2O before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 8



(MS) Science Bee Round 8
Regulation Tossups
(1)    Enhancer trapping is a gene expression technique commonly used in this organism
that only has four chromosomes. Class 2 transposable elements called P-elements were
discovered in the genome of this organism that contains recessive traits such as vestigial
wings and ebony bodies. Thomas Hunt Morgan discovered the white-eyed mutation in, for
the point, what insect model organism whose scientific name is Drosophila Melanogaster
[[dro-SOH-fih-luh muh-LAN-noh-gah-ster]].

ANSWER: fruit fly (accept Drosophila Melanogaster before mention)

(2)     Using previous studies from Otto Meyerhof and Edward Buchner, Gustav Embden
proposed a detailed ten-step outline for this process that is parallel to the pentose
phosphate pathway. This process, which is catalyzed by enzymes such as phospho-
fructokinase and hexokinase, is anaerobic and involves the input of two ATP molecules. For
the point, name this first step of cellular respiration, which precedes the Kreb Cycle, and in
which glucose is split into two pyruvate molecules.

ANSWER: glycolysis

(3)    This law describes systems with a compressibility factor equal to one, which are
modeled by kinetic molecular theory. This law is equivalent to setting the A and B terms
equal to zero in the van der Waals equation, which disregards particle volume and
intermolecular forces. It was created from a combination of Boyle's, Charles's, and
Avogadro's laws. The statement "P V equals N R T" is, For the point, what law that models a
hypothetical state of matter?

ANSWER: ideal gas law (accept general gas equation)

(4)     This process is regulated by the methylation of cytosines at CpG sites, and proteins
such as EGR1 and ETS2. The TATAAT sequence or Pribnow Box initiates this process in
prokaryotes, while for eukaryotes, it is initiated at the TATA box. Following this process, a
five prime cap and poly-A tail are added to its end product. RNA polymerase is the key
enzyme of, for the point, what process in which a strand of template DNA is copied into
messenger RNA?

ANSWER: transcription
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 8


(5)     The "Ping-Pong" mechanism can be used to describe the change of these molecules
into intermediate forms. Michaelis–Menten[[mih-KAY-liss MEN-ten]] kinetics help explain
the activity of these molecules that can be activated or inhibited at their allosteric site. The
"lock and key" model fails to explain the transition state that these molecules obtain when
binding to a substrate at their active site. For the point, name these biological catalysts that
help speed up chemical reactions.

ANSWER: enzymes (prompt on "protein(s)"; do not accept or prompt on "catalysts")

(6)     Guanylate cyclase is activated when this molecule binds to the heme group, and this
molecule is the principal propellant used in aerosol sprays. Along with a molecule with a
greater number of oxygen atoms, this oxide is responsible for pollutive phenomena such as
smog and acid rain. For the point, name this diatomic molecule containing one nitrogen and
one oxygen atom.

ANSWER: Nitric Oxide (accept Nitrogen Oxide; accept Nitrogen Monoxide)

(7)     Fragmentations of this organelle has been associated with Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's disease. Molecules tagged with mannose-6-phosphate are directed to the
lysosome from this organelle that receives COPII [[cop-two]] transported proteins at its cis
face. Membrane-enclosed discs called cisternae are found in, for the point, what organelle
that packages protein and lipid molecules into membrane-bound vesicles, often described
as the "post office" of a eukaryotic cell?

ANSWER: Golgi Apparatus (or Golgi Complex; or Golgi Body)

(8)      The left recurrent laryngeal [[luh-RIN-jeel]] nerve loops under part of this structure.
The incorrect positioning of this structure is one of the defects that make up the tetralogy of
Fallot [[fuh-LOH]]. The wall of this structure often "bulges out" in people with Marfan
syndrome. The ascending and descending parts of this vessel are connected by its namesake
arch. The semilunar valve named for this blood vessel connects it to the left ventricle. Blood
is carried away from the heart by, for the point, what largest artery in humans?

ANSWER: Aorta (accept Ascending aorta; or Descending aorta; accept Aortic arch; accept
Aortic valve; prompt on “artery”)

(9)    The surface of Mars is an example of the crescent-shape type of these topographical
features known as Barchans [[bar-CANS]]. The removal of sediments cause surface
depressions known as blowouts which are typically associated with the parabolic type of
these topographical features, whose slip face is convex in shape. Draas are a large-scale
version of, for the point, what topographical features that are mounds of sand formed by
wind deposits?

ANSWER: Sand Dunes (accept Dune System; accept Dune Complex; accept Dune Field;
accept Crescent Dunes; accept Barchan Dunes; accept Parabolic Dunes)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                            Round 8


(10) This structure can be classified into Piedmont and Tidewater types and cuts a U-
shaped valley of surrounding bedrock to form a fjord [[FYORD]]. The retraction of these
structures can result in the formation of drumlins or moraines. When these structures
generally found in polar regions break apart, they form crevasses or large icebergs.
Antarctica is made up of, for the point, what large moving body of dense ice?

ANSWER: Glaciers

(11) This mathematical concept has a double type that only involves odd numbers, and a
hyper type that form the discriminants of Hermite polynomials. This mathematical function
increases faster than exponential growth, but slower than a double exponential function.
For the point, name this mathematical function that is the product of all positive integers
less than or equal to the input of the function.

ANSWER: Factorial (accept double factorial; accept hyper factorial)

(12) VSEPR [[VES-purr]] theory predicts that a water molecule will exhibit a tetrahedral
arrangement of the hybrid type of these entities. The spatial orientation of the simplest type
of these entities is spherical. With varieties that include the s, p, d, and f types, these are, for
the point, what region in an atom that describes the location and wave-like behavior of an
electron?

ANSWER: Atomic Orbitals (accept specific orbital types such as S, P, D, or F Orbitals before
mentioned; accept Wavefunctions; accept Energy Levels)

(13) Description acceptable. H.K. Erben suggested that this event was caused by
deformed eggshells, while another debunked theory came from L.R. Croft, who proposed
that this event was caused by cataracts. S.E. Flanders suggested that this event was due to
the influx of caterpillars and their tendency to eat a copious amount of plant material,
leading to the animals central to this event starving. The K-T boundary was characterized
by, for the point, what event that is widely believed to have been caused by an asteroid
impact, killing off an entire species of large reptiles nearly 65 million years ago?

ANSWER: Extinction of the Dinosaurs (accept answers synonymous to mass extinction of
the dinosaurs; accept Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event; or K-Pg extinction event;
accept Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction event; or K-T Extinction event))

(14) The quotient of these entities can be expressed as a solution to a system of linear
equations via Cramer's Rule. These entities, which come in Singleton and Jacobian varieties,
are non-commutative when multiplied. The determinant of a two-by-two variety of these
entities is ad minus bc. For the point, name these rectangular mathematical entities that can
be arranged in rows and columns.

ANSWER: matrix (or matrices; accept Singleton Matrix; accept Jacobian Matrix)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 8


(15) Though not known as an economist, this scientist conducted a study on the value of
money in which he discovered an early form of Gresham’s law and established quantity
theory. This man's seminal work, On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres, was not
published until a year after his death in Poland. For the point, name this polymath who
formulated the heliocentric model of the solar system.

ANSWER: Nicolaus Copernicus (accept Copernican System; or Copernican Revolution)

(16) After her death in 1958, the work of this scientist was continued by Aaron Klug,
which earned him the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1982. Raymond Gosling, one of this
scientist's students at King's College in London, was responsible for taking Photo 51, an X-
ray diffraction image of a paracrystalline gel composed of DNA fiber. For the point, name
this chemist whose influence and uncredited work on the structure of DNA led to her being
called the “wronged heroine.”

ANSWER: Rosalind Franklin (Rosalind Elsie Franklin)

(17) Binary types of this process are modeled on a McCabe-Thiele diagram. Refluxing is
performed during this process to continually recondense vapors, and the "fractional" type
of this process is often used to refine crude oil. Liquor is made by doing this process to
fermented beverages. For the point, name this method of separating liquids based on their
boiling points.

ANSWER: distillation (accept fractional distillation; accept pressure-swing distillation)

(18) Access to these areas were limited in one location after soil samples found inside
were positive for a fungus known to cause the white-nose syndrome. Within these areas are
formations made of nodes of calcite, aragonite, or gypsum known as “popcorn”, and another
formation within these areas are made from sheets of calcium carbonates known as
flowstones. The erosion of limestone forms, for the point, what natural, underground voids
that contain stalactites and stalagmites, a place where spelunkers explore?

ANSWER: Caves (accept Caverns)

(19) In quantum computers, this task can be accomplished by using Grover’s algorithm.
This task follows “pruning” in a notable solution to optimization problems. This task can be
performed in depth-first or breadth-first ways in graphs, and a common demonstration of
divide-and-conquer is the “binary” form of this task. For the point, name this task of finding
a certain value in a given input.

ANSWER: Searching (accept depth-first search; accept breadth-first search; accept binary
search)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                    Round 8


(20) The soda-lime type of this material can be made through the addition of sodium and
calcium carbonate, while the volcanic type is naturally occurring. Boron trioxide is a major
component of one form of this material used to make laboratory equipment. This
amorphous solid is non-crystalline, and can be manufactured through a process known as
"blowing". For the point, name this transparent material made of silica primarily found in
windows.

ANSWER: glass (accept soda-lime glass; accept volcanic glass; accept glass blowing)

(21) This set of numbers is not bounded above in the reals by the Archimedean property.
Peano’s axioms are a set of rules governing these numbers. The sum of the reciprocal of
these numbers is equivalent to the harmonic series. This set of numbers is the intersection
of the positive numbers with the integers. For the point, what set of numbers includes 1, 2,
3, and so on?

ANSWER: Natural numbers (accept Positive integers; accept non-negative integers;
accept whole numbers; or counting numbers)

(22) This stage of a star's life involves the contraction of its helium core and the
expansion of its outer hydrogen layers, and this stage precedes the white and black dwarf
stages. Low and intermediate-mass stars will become this type, and our Sun is expected to
engulf Venus and possibly Earth when it becomes this type of star in five billion years. For
the point, name these large, highly luminous stars.

ANSWER: Red Giants (prompt on "star(s)")

(23) This force transforms charge in the tribo-electric effect, and can be depicted in
Amontons Law, which states that this force is directly proportional to the applied load. The
strength of this force is proportional to the normal force and can be related by a namesake
coefficient symbolized mu [[MYOO]]. For the point, name this force that comes in static and
kinetic forms and opposes the change in motion.

ANSWER: Friction (accept Static Friction; accept Kinetic Friction; accept Dry Friction)

(24) The largest of these structures in the Western hemisphere is named for Jennifer
Chalsty and can be found in Jersey City. Other notable American examples of these
structures include the Hayden in New York and the Adler in Chicago. Archimedes is
crediting with creating, for the point, what usually dome-shaped structures in which
viewers can watch the projected movement of the solar system?

ANSWER: Planetarium (accept Jennifer Chalsty Planetarium; accept Hayden
Planetarium; accept Adler Planetarium)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 8


(25) The human genome contains 54 genes of this protein in which mutations of its gene
expression may cause Ichthyosis [[ik-thee-OH-sis]] bollusa of Siemens or Steatocystoma
multiplex. The alpha type of this protein is characterized into two types, type I and type II,
both of which make up a subunit dimer called the coiled coil. Claws, feathers, and scales are
made of, for the point, what fibrous protein that also make up human fingernails and hair?

ANSWER: Keratin (accept Alpha-Keratin; prompt on "Scleroprotein")

(26) Some animals with this property have cryoprotectants that increase the
concentration of solutes inside its cells, as well as antifreeze proteins that prevents the
growth of ice crystals. Animals with adaptations for this property include the African
lungfish, which buries itself in the ground in preparation for hibernation. For the point,
name this property in animals, such as amphibians and reptiles, that require regulation of
body temperature based on its external environment.

ANSWER: Ectotherms (accept Cold-blooded; accept Poikilotherms)

(27) Types of this weather phenomenon include orographic, stratiform, and convective,
and this weather phenomenon is measured using a udometer. According to the
Thornthwaite system, the index relating to the effectiveness of this weather phenomenon in
steppe vegetations ranges between 16 and 31, which classifies it as semiarid. For the point,
name this weather phenomenon that formed when frozen or liquid water is released from
clouds, whose subtypes include hail, rain, and snow.

ANSWER: Precipitation (accept Orographic Precipitation; accept Stratiform
Precipitation; accept Convective Precipitation; accept Hail; accept Rain; accept Sleet;
accept Snow)

(28) This body’s 1600-mile Aitken basin is one of the largest craters in the solar system.
This body was likely formed in the “Big Splash,” a collision with a Mars-sized object. This
object contains a favorable landing spot called the Sea of Tranquility, and the gravitational
pull of this object is responsible for tides. For the point, name this celestial body that waxes
and wanes as it orbits the Earth.

ANSWER: Earth’s Moon (or Luna)

(29) The power of a test refers to the ability to correctly reject one of these statements
and avoid a Type Two error. If the p-value is less than significance level alpha, the null type
of this statement is rejected in favor of the alternative type. In the scientific method, these
statements are often written in an "if/then" format. For the point, name these proposed
statements that can be tested by experimentation.

ANSWER: Hypothesis (or Hypotheses; accept Null Hypothesis; accept Alternative
Hypothesis)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                    Round 8


(30) One surface feature of a satellite orbiting this body was described by NASA as a
“mountain sitting in a moat.” This body has not made a full orbit around the Sun since its
discovery due to its orbital period being over 200 years. This object was discovered by
Clyde Tombaugh and it is named after the Roman god of the underworld. For the point,
name this body which, in 2006, was reclassified as a dwarf planet.

ANSWER: Pluto (prompt on “Charon” if buzz firstline)



Extra Questions
(1)     The breaking up and recombination of molecules that contain this entity is known as
their namesake “metathesis.” Molecules that contain this structure between two carbon
atoms are known as alkenes. Molecular oxygen contains this structure between its two
oxygen atoms. For the point, name this structure, designated with two lines, where two
pairs of electrons are shared between two atoms.

ANSWER: Double bond (accept Olefin; accept answers involving Two bonds; accept
Alkenes before mentioned)

(2)     These are not mountains, but one type of these landforms is created due to slow
convergence of tectonic plates and upward movement of the earth’s crust. Another type of
these landforms is formed due to the upwelling of magma and the accumulation of lava in
layers. Dissected and volcanic are the two major types of, for the point, what features that
are formed by thermal expansion and crustal shortening, and are elevated pieces of land
with flat tops?

ANSWER: Plateaus (accept dissected plateaus; accept volcanic plateaus)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                          Backup



(MS) Science Bee Backup
Regulation Tossups
(1)    Members of this bacterial genus are classified based on their ability to lyse
blood cells in the Lancefield grouping. Infection by a member of this genus can cause
(+) rheumatic fever if left untreated. Scarlet fever is caused by the pyogenes species of
this genus, which leaves a white exudate on the (*) tonsils in an infection commonly
detected by throat culture. For the points, name this genus of spherical bacteria that cause a
namesake sore throat.

ANSWER: Streptococcus (accept Streptococcus pyogenes; accept strep throat)

(2)     These structures secrete HIF-1 and VEGF to induce angiogenesis of a "leaky
vasculature", and its surrounding microenvironment is commonly acidic due to the
(+) Warburg effect. "Caretaker", "gatekeeper", and "landscaper" are the three
categories of genes named for "suppressing" these structures which act in opposition
to oncogenes. Proliferating through (*) blood vessels during metastasis, these are, for the
points, what masses of cancer cells that are classified as either benign or malignant?

ANSWER: Tumors (accept Cancer Cells; accept Neoplasms; accept Tumor Suppressor
Genes)

(3)     Entities named for these molecules have a subtype called caveolae [[KAH-vee-
OH-leh]] that are flask-shaped. Ceramides [[SEH-ruh-midez]] are an example of the
"sphingo" [[SFIN-goh]] type of these molecules. (+) Microdomains enriched in
cholesterol are “rafts” named for these nonpolar molecules. The cell membrane
consists of a bilayer named for these hydrophobic molecules. The main components
of living (*) cells include proteins, carbohydrates, and for the points, what biomolecules
synonymous with fats?

ANSWER: Lipid (accept Lipid raft or Sphingolipid; prompt on “fat” or “fatty acid”)

(4)     The dynamic of this structure is represented by the Singer-Nicolas model,
which explains how smaller (+) molecules can pass through this organelle without
assistance through osmosis or diffusion. The fluid mosaic model is a representation
of this organelle, which is present in both eukaryotes and (*) prokaryotes. For the
points, name this organelle that surrounds the cytoplasm and protects the inner
components of a cell from its environment?

ANSWER: Cell Membrane (or Plasma Membrane; or Cytoplasmic Membrane; accept
Plasmalemma; do not prompt or accept "Cell Wall")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Backup


(5)     The dynamic of salt and freshwater in these locations can be demonstrated
using the Ghyben-Herzberg (+) equation. These areas come in confined and
unconfined varieties, are surrounded by areas known as aquicludes, and are studied
in the science of (*) hydrogeology. For the points, identify these layers of permeable rock
from which water wells extract groundwater.

ANSWER: Aquifers (accept confined aquifer; or unconfined aquifer)

(6)    This tissue is removed in a process called girdling. According to the pressure-
flow hypothesis, this (+) tissue performs photosynthate partitioning by translocating
carbon solutes. This tissue consists mainly of companion cells and sieve tube
elements, which come from the meristem. Sap (*) is carried by, for the points, what
vascular plant tissue that transports sugars and nutrients, as opposed to xylem?

ANSWER: Phloem (prompt on "Bark")

(7)     The greatest quantity of buildings made with this material can be found in the
city of Ashgabat. This material comes in many forms, including Bianco (+) Sevic and
the Etowah form. A pure white type of this rock is formed from the transformation of
the dolomite protolith. Formed from the metamorphism of (*) limestone, this is, for the
points, what rock often used in sculpture?

ANSWER: Marble (Editor's note: in geology, marble is specifically metamorphosed
limestone, whereas this distinction is not always true in stonemasonry.)

(8)     These phenomena and the polar easterlies travel in the same direction,
though the polar easterlies are (+) farther north and south by at least 30 degrees
latitude. These entities meet at the Intertropical Convergence Zone. These winds
blow from east to (*) west near the equator. For the points, identify these winds named for
their role in allowing ships to cross the Atlantic with greater ease and facilitate commerce.

ANSWER: Trade Winds (prompt on "Easterlies")

(9)    The fork-lined method is a tactic used to solve problems presented in these
diagrams. The ratio resulting from cases observing epistasis (+) are an exception to
one form of these diagrams which would normally constitute a 9:3:3:1 ratio. These
diagrams also outline the codominance relationship between the alleles of A and B
blood types. Monohybrid and (*) dihybrid crosses are used to visualize, for the points,
what diagrams that outline the allele interaction of two parents to predict the phenotypic
outcomes of an offspring?

ANSWER: Punnett Squares
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Backup


(10) When this structure is cooled by advection, it becomes a thicker, low viscosity
structure known as “Polish doughnuts.” The turbulence this object has when orbiting
is caused by a (+) fluid instability known as magnetorotational instability, which
happens when the angular velocity of fluid is destabilized by a weak magnetic field.
Dust, (*) gas, and particles make up, for the points, what flat elliptical structures made of
debris that surround a gravitational source, such as black holes?

ANSWER: Accretion Disks (accept Circumstellar Disks)

(11) This scientist proposed the parton model of hadrons and the path integral
formulation of quantum mechanics. (+) Constructs named for this scientist can be
used to visualize scattering processes. This scientist’s Lectures on Physics is one of the
most popular (*) science books ever written. For the points, name this Caltech physicist
whose namesake “diagrams” represent the motion of particles.

ANSWER: Richard Feynman (accept Feynman Diagrams)

(12) Variations of these molecules include d5SICS and dNaM, which feature
aromatic rings rather than purine rings. These molecules participate in cell signaling
to create cyclic (+) guanosine [[GWAH-noh-seen]] monosphate and cyclic adenosine
[[ah-DEH-no-seen]] monosphate. Three subunits exist within these molecules,
including a five-carbon sugar and guanine, adenine, (*) cytosine, or thymine. For the
points, name these organic molecules, consisting of a nucleoside and a phosphate, found in
DNA and RNA.

ANSWER: Nucleotides (accept 5-Nucleotides)

(13) Eigenvalues can be found by performing this operation on the original matrix
minus lambda times the identity and setting the result equal to (+) zero. This
operation on a matrix is zero if and only if the matrix is noninvertible, and taking a
cross product is equivalent to performing this operation on a 3 by (*) 3 matrix. For the
points, identify this operation, which for a 2 by 2 matrix equals a times d minus b times c.

ANSWER: Determinant

(14) A spot found in a crater on Mars was dedicated to this figure during the Mars
Exploration Rover mission in 2005. It was revealed in 2002 that this explorer died
from overheating due to the failure of her (+) spacecraft's central R-7 sustainer,
although it was first reported that this cosmonaut's death was caused by oxygen
depletion. Flying into space aboard (*) Sputnik 2, this is, for the points, what Soviet
cosmonaut who became the first animal to orbit Earth, also referred to as "Muttnik"?

ANSWER: Laika (prompt on “Muttnik” before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Backup


(15) This body was termed the “little cloud” in 905 by Persian astronomer Al-Sufi.
This object was the main focus of the Shapley-Curtis (+) debate, which argued
whether this object was an “island universe.” This body is designated 31 in the
Messier catalog, and it is predicted to collide with the Milky Way in about 4.5 (*)
billion years. For the points, name this closest galaxy to the Milky Way, named after the
daughter of Cassiopeia.

ANSWER: Andromeda galaxy

(16) The JTWC classifies these objects as a 'super' variant if they reach the
equivalent of a Category 4 for a different kind of storm on the (+) Saffir-Simpson
scale. The name for these phenomena comes from Portuguese and Chinese, and these
storms affect areas like Japan and (*) Hong Kong. For the points, name these types of
cyclones that are different from hurricanes and occur typically in the northwest and
southwest Pacific and the Indian Ocean.

ANSWER: Typhoon (prompt on "cyclone"; do not accept or prompt on "Hurricane")

(17) This many bonding pairs of electrons are found in molecules with a seesaw
geometry. This (+) is the atomic number of the lightest element in emerald. One
molecule of hydrogen peroxide contains this many total atoms. Methane contains this
many (*) hydrogen atoms. For the points, how many bonds can carbon form, which is also
its number of valence electrons?

ANSWER: Four

(18) A chemist from this country discovered a way of predicting reaction rates
based on temperature and wrote an early acid-base definition. This country's village
of (+) Ytterby was where the elements of yttrium, ytterbium, erbium, and terbium
were discovered. A scientist from this country invented the smokeless powder
Ballistite, as well as dynamite. Svante (*) Arrhenius was from, for the points, what
country, whose native Alfred Nobel names a set of annual prizes?

ANSWER: Sweden (or Sverige; accept Kingdom of Sweden; or Konungariket Sverige)

(19) This company's TDI technology creates more power while disbursing less fuel
and producing fewer emissions. This company lost half its board after the (+) CARB
denied a proposed fix for vehicles with 2.0 liter engines. CEO Mark Winterkorn
resigned from this company after certain vehicles produced 40 times more nitrogen
oxide than during (*) emissions testing. For the points, name this German car company
that produced the Beetle.

ANSWER: Volkswagen (accept VW; accept Volkswagen Beetle)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Backup


(20) Reacting this compound with copper oxide forms a bright blue salt, and a
stock 98% solution of this compound has a molarity of 18.4. The 100% pure (+)
version of this substance has a Hammett function of negative twelve, and was known
as oil of vitriol. This substance is formed from a vanadium oxide catalyst in the
contact (*) process. For the points, name this strong acid with formula H2SO4.

ANSWER: Sulfuric Acid (accept H2SO4 before mentioned; prompt on "Oil of Vitriol" before
mentioned)

(21) One type of these entities can be iteratively solved using Runge-Kutta
methods. Guessing solutions composed of exponential functions or using (+) Euler’s
[[OY-lers]] method are simple methods for explicitly solving the ordinary type of
these entities. Euler and Lagrange name a system for these equations, and a first step
in dealing with these equations is to employ separation of (*) variables. For the points,
what type of equations contain a variable and its derivatives?

ANSWER: Differential Equations (accept Ordinary Differential Equation; or ODE; prompt
on “Derivative”)

(22) Stephen Kleene [[KLAY-nee]] names a type of this symbol that returns a set of
strings closed under concatenation. A forward slash and this symbol are used to
delimit block comments in (+) JavaScript and CSS. In languages like C++, this symbol
is used to de-reference a pointer variable. This symbol denotes required fields in web
forms written in (*) HTML. For the points, name this computer programming symbol that
also typically represents multiplication.

ANSWER: asterisk (or star; accept Kleene star)

(23) In fluorescence microscopy, this organelle is commonly stained with the dye
Hoechst [[HURKST]] 33342 when imaging cells or tissues. A structure within this
organelle, the karyolymph, is noted for (+) "sap"-like substance, while another
structure in this organelle, continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum, is
responsible for the synthesis of ribosomes. (*) Transcription occurs in this organelle,
only found in eukaryotes. For the points, the “control center” of the cell is what organelle
where where DNA is stored?

ANSWER: Atomic Nucleus (accept Nuclei)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Backup


(24) One experiment testing this theory measured gamma rays emitted from an
iron sample placed in a loudspeaker cone, and was performed by Pound and Rebka.
The equivalence (+) principle relates two forms of mass in this theory, which is also
described by a set of field equations that contained the cosmological constant. Gravity
is explained by the curvature of (*) space-time in, for the points, what theory proposed by
Einstein with a "special" counterpart?

ANSWER: general relativity (accept GR; prompt on "relativity"; do not accept or prompt
on "special relativity")

(25) A value named for this scientist is the time derivative of the scale factor
divided by the scale factor. An instrument named for this scientist captured high-
resolution images of (+) Shoemaker-Levy 9’s collision with Jupiter. This man found
that an object’s distance and redshift are directly proportional to each other. An
astronomical (*) constant is named for, for the points, what namesake of a space
telescope?

ANSWER: Edwin Powell Hubble (accept Hubble Space Telescope)

(26) This type of mixture forms at the Bancroft point, which falls within the valid
ranges of the Antoine equation. Entrainers or a "pressure-swing" (+) technique using
multiple columns can be used to "break" these systems, which deviate from Raoult's
law. A binary example of these systems is a 96% solution of ethanol in water. Also
called "constant (*) boiling point mixtures", these are, for the points, what solutions which
cannot be separated by simple distillation?

ANSWER: Azeotropes (accept Constant Boiling Point Mixtures before mentioned; prompt
on "Solutions"; prompt on "Non-ideal")

(27) Alfven waves travelling within these substances are modelled using MHD
theory, or magnetohydrodynamics. Magnetic fields are used to confine these
substances in the shape of a torus within a (+) tokamak. Solar flares are caused by
magnetic reconnection within these substances because they make up the mass of the
sun, as well as the discharge in (*) lightning strikes. For the points, name these ionized
gases considered the "fourth state of matter".

ANSWER: plasmas
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Backup


(28) A disorder that affects this organ includes a benign growth called the
arytenoid granuloma, while another results in the swelling of this organ caused by a
gelatinous fluid in a disorder called (+) Reinke’s edema [[eh-DEH-mah]]. This organ,
which is situated underneath the hyoid bone, becomes inflamed by a bacterial
infection called croup, which also infects the bronchi and trachea. As the (*) epiglottis
opens, air enters, for the points, what organ in the neck that houses vocal cords, also known
as the voice box?

ANSWER: Larynx (prompt on “Voice Box” before mentioned)

(29) Early signs of the Fournier’s type of this disease, also called necrotizing
fasciitis [[fah-shee-EYE-tiss]], include (+) pain and redness surrounding an infection
point. Various treatments for this disease include maggot therapy, hyperbaric oxygen
therapy, and debridement. Sepsis and (*) amputation are complications of, for the points,
what disease caused by a bacterial infection or inadequate blood supply that leads to tissue
death, characterized by a change in skin color?

ANSWER: Gangrene (or Gangrenous Necrosis; accept Fournier’s Gangrene; accept
Necrotizing Fasciitis before mentioned; prompt on answers along the lines of “tissue
death” before mentioned)

(30) Thales’ [[THAY-LEEZ]] theorem applies when this entity is the diameter of an
excircle. It’s not 1, but this entity is the numerator in the cosecant [[koh-SEE-kehnt]]
(+) function. The length of this entity equals the square root of two times one of its
smaller counterparts in a 45-45-90 triangle. This term is represented by the "c" in the
Pythagorean (*) theorem. For the points, give this term for the longest side of a right
triangle.

ANSWER: Hypotenuse
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                   Backup


Extra Questions
(1)     The accumulation of this molecule by macrophages triggers the formation of
foam cells seen in atherosclerosis. The Apolipo-protein (+) B100 test measures the
protein of the same name that is responsible for transporting this molecule
throughout the body. HDL and LDL are considered the good (*) and bad forms of, for
the points, what important lipid in the body, a waxy substance found in blood that is
essential to modulating the fluidity of the cell membrane?

ANSWER: Cholesterol (prompt on "HDL" or "LDL"; prompt on “Lipids”)

(2)    Milton's reagent is made by dissolving this element in nitric acid and diluting
it with water. An outbreak of Minamata disease was caused by this metal, which
forms alloys called (+) amalgams and is found in its +2 state in the mineral cinnabar.
One atmosphere is equal to the pressure of 760mm of this element that can be found
in barometers and old (*) glass thermometers. For the points, name this element with
atomic number 80 and chemical symbol Hg that is liquid at room temperature.

ANSWER: mercury (accept "Hg" before mention)

(3)     The acid-fast type of these substances is used to identify tuberculosis in
patient samples. Histologists often analyze biopsies using one of these substances
containing both (+) hematoxylin and eosin. One of these substances called crystal
violet binds to the bacterial cell wall in a technique named for Gram. Cells (*) can be
visualized using, for the points, what substances that provide contrasting colors to a
biological sample?

ANSWER: stains (or dyes; accept Gram stain; accept H&E stain; accept acid-fast stain)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Extras



(MS) Science Bee Extras
Extra Questions
(1)    It’s not the pancreas, but this organ’s secretion of fluids can be regulated by
secretin. (+) Intrinsic factor is produced by parietal cells in this organ, which also
produces hydrochloric acid. Peristalsis moves matter through this organ after it is
received by the (*) esophagus. For the points, name this digestive organ in which food is
broken down by acid and enzymes following chewing.

ANSWER: Stomach

(2)     The development of these structures can be represented with the ABC model.
They’re not fruits, but the presence of these structures differentiate (+) angiosperms
from gymnosperms. Carpels and sepals are components of these structures.
Movement of pollen from the anther to the stigma of these structures causes (*)
pollination. For the points, name these reproductive organs of plants which contain petals.

ANSWER: Flowers (accept Blooms; accept Blossoms; prompt on "petal")

(3)     Transfection is a technique used to introduce nucleic acids into these
structures, which were first discovered by Robert Hooke while looking under a
microscope. One (+) form of these structures is responsible for conducting impulses
in the nervous system, while another helps transport oxygen around the body. These
units are composed of (*) cytoplasm enclosed in a namesake membrane. For the points,
name this smallest unit of biological life.

ANSWER: cells (accept neurons; or nerve cell; accept red blood cells; accept cell
membrane)

(4)     This quantity that appears in the Fresnel number can be computed using the
formula "h over mc". Radio waves are the weakest form of electromagnetic (+)
radiation because they have the highest value for this quantity, which is measured by
the distance between adjacent troughs. On a visible light spectrum, the color green
has a value ranging between (*) 495 to 570 nanometers for, for the points, what quantity
that describes the horizontal distance between two peaks of a wave, symbolized lambda?

ANSWER: Wavelength (accept Compton Wavelength; prompt of "Lambda" before
mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Extras


(5)    Planck’s constant over this quantity is equal to the de Broglie [[deh BROY]]
wavelength of a particle. The net change in this quantity is equal to impulse, while the
rate of change of this quantity is equal to (+) force. This quantity, whose SI unit is
equivalent to the newton-second, changes equally to the net force acting on it,
according to Newton's Second (*) Law of Motion. For the points, what quantity is equal to
mass times velocity, denoted as the letter "p"?

ANSWER: Momentum (accept P before mentioned; accept Linear Momentum; accept
Angular Momentum; accept Translational Momentum)

(6)     This quantity of a chemical element is correlated with the frequency of X-rays
it emits by Moseley’s law, and neutronium (+) has a value of zero for this quantity.
When a chemical element has an equal number of electrons to this quantity, it is
electrically neutral. Denoted as the symbol (*) "Z", this is, for the points, what property
of a chemical element that equals the number of protons it has, which is one for hydrogen?

ANSWER: Atomic Number (accept Number of Protons before mentioned; prompt on "Z"
before mentioned)

(7)     This molecule was first discovered by Frederich Miescher [[MEE-shuh]] in
1869 while studying the composition of white blood cells. Photo 51
 (+) reveals information about the structure of this molecule that was first
photographed by a student of Rosalind Franklin. Typically abbreviated using a three-
letter (*) term, this is, for the points, what genetic material for which James Watson and
Francis Crick won the 1962 Nobel Prize after discovering its double-helix structure?

ANSWER: DNA (or Deoxyribonucleic Acid)

(8)     The deadliest one of these events was prompted by the 1970 Ancash
earthquake, and it (+) became the second-deadliest landslide-related event in
twentieth century South America. Slab types of these events occur by the collapse of a
weak layer beneath a layer of tightly packed (*) graupel. For the points, name this rapid
flow of snow down a steep slope, such as a mountain.

ANSWER: Avalanche (prompt on "Snow Slide")

(9)     David Geffen was forced to open an access point to a Malibu beach named for
this element, also nicknamed "Billionaire's Beach." A salt (+) lake with this element's
name in Patagonia contains the lowest point in the Western Hemisphere. Besides the
elements that are gases at room temperature, this element is the (*) universe's most
abundant. For the points, name this element whose allotropes include graphite and
diamond.

ANSWER: Carbon (or C; accept Element 6; accept Carbon Beach)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Extras


(10) Paget’s disease is a rare condition associated with this disease that causes
eczema-like changes to the skin. Recent research suggests that Mucin and (+) HER-2
are potential biomarkers for this disease that can be classified by its expression of
progesterone and estrogen receptors. The mutation of the BRCA1 gene increases the
risk for this disease, which can be treated through a (*) mastectomy. Mammograms can
help detect, for the points, what disease that is the most common form of cancer in women
worldwide?

ANSWER: Breast Cancer (prompt on "Cancer")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                  Semifinals



(MS) Science Bee Semifinals
Regulation Tossups
(1)     The first of these objects discovered by the Keck Observatory was the Gliese
876b, and Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2019 for
discovering one of these objects named 51 (+) Pegasi b. These objects can be detected
with the radial-velocity method, while other methods for detecting these objects
include Doppler spectroscopy and transit photometry. Gas (*) Giants, Neptunian, and
Super-Earth are types of, for the points, what planetary bodies that orbit a star outside of
the solar system?

ANSWER: Exoplanets (or Extrasolar Planets; prompt on "planet"; prompt on "Neptunian"
or "Super-Earth" before mentioned)

(2)     One form of this property is caused by a mutated DD-transpeptidase enzyme.
Genes that confer this property, such as the SCCmec cassette, can be spread through
horizontal (+) gene transfer. The misuse of broad-spectrum drugs can cause cells to
develop this property, which can be mediated by efflux pumps or beta-lactamases.
The strain (*) MRSA [[murr-suh]] has, for the points, what property of bacteria that cannot
be killed with drugs such as penicillin?

ANSWER: antibiotic resistance (or antimicrobial resistance; or AMR; or ABR; accept any
answer with word forms of resistance that mentions specific antibiotics like penicillin,
beta-lactam, or methicillin; prompt on just "resistance")

(3)    One pathway of this process involves dimers of the protein Bax and Bak. TNF-
alpha receptors can initiate this process upon binding by activation of death domain
proteins. (+) Cytochrome c is released into the cytosol during this process, and
caspase-9 causes the final destruction of the cell in this process. Blebbing (*) is a
characteristic stage of, for the points, what process of programmed cell death, contrasted
with necrosis?

ANSWER: Apoptosis

(4)    Members of this genus develop from trophozoites into schizonts, and then
burst into multiple merozoites to infect red blood cells. Tertian fever can be caused
by both the (+) ovale and vivax species of this genus. Artemisinin and quinine are
used to treat infections caused by the falciparum species of this parasitic genus,
which is carried by the Anopheles (*) mosquito. For the points, name this genus of
protozoa that causes malaria.

ANSWER: Plasmodium (accept Plasmodium falciparum; accept Plasmodium vivax;
accept Plasmodium ovale)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                  Semifinals


(5)     The phenomenon of “marine snow” or “ocean dandruff” is caused by the
falling this material from the water column to the seafloor. In aquatic ecosystems,
this material is a source of nutrients for microbes living in the (+) benthic zone, and a
standard example of a food chain named after this material on terrestrial ecosystems
begins with dead leaves being eaten by a woodlouse, which is then eaten by a (*)
blackbird. For the points, name this biological debris that is primarily made of decomposing
plant and animal parts, including feces.

ANSWER: Detritus (prompt on answers synonymous to “dead matter” or “debris”)

(6)    This asterism is surrounded by stars like Rigel, Castor, and Pollux. This
asterism encompasses much of the faint constellation (+) Monoceros. Its three
component stars form an equilateral triangle when drawn on the celestial sphere.
This asterism contains the brightest stars from Orion, Canis Major, and Canis (*)
Minor. For the points, name this asterism which contains three of the brightest stars in the
winter sky.

ANSWER: Winter Triangle (do not accept or prompt on “Summer Triangle”)

(7)     This region is the namesake of a hypothesis that predicts domal topographic
uplift events. Post-perovskite (+) most likely exists in the bottom-most part of this
region. The asthenosphere lies below the Moho discontinuity in this layer of Earth.
The D-double prime layer marks the boundary between this layer and the (*) outer
core. For the points, name this largest layer of Earth below the crust.

ANSWER: Mantle (accept Mantle plume hypothesis)

(8)    This region of Earth’s atmosphere contains the Kennelly-Heavyside layer. The
plasmasphere lies above this atmospheric region. The D (+) layer, E and sporadic E
layers, and the F layer subregions all make up this region. The thermosphere is
encompassed within this region, which also contains parts of the mesosphere and (*)
exosphere. For the points, name this electron-charged region of the atmosphere.

ANSWER: Ionosphere (prompt on mentioned layers until "encompassed")

(9)    These land features’ location qualifies them as ecotones between river and
maritime environments. One (+) of these bodies of water drains into the Atlantic
Ocean, and it was formed at the Punta Gorda by the confluence of the Uruguay and (*)
Parana Rivers. For the points, name this body of water with a direct connection to the ocean
and with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it.

ANSWER: Estuary
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                Semifinals


(10) A "disequilibrium" named for this phenomenon provides the basis for
genome-wide association studies. The LOD score is a statistical test for this effect,
which is measured in units of (+) centimorgans that correspond to one percent
recombination. This effect provides an exception to Mendel's law of independent (*)
assortment. For the points, name this phenomenon in which two genes located close
together on a chromosome tend to be inherited together.

ANSWER: genetic linkage (accept word forms; accept linkage disequilibrium)

(11) Leopold von Buch divided this period into three categories called the Black,
Brown, and White. Remnants (+) of limestone from this geological era were first
identified in the French-Swiss mountain range after which this period was named.
Constituting the middle of the (*) Mesozoic Era, this is, for the points, what geological
period preceded by the Triassic and succeeded by the Cretaceous?

ANSWER: Jurassic Period

(12) The organizers of the KEO, one of these objects in space, said, “All the
messages received, without undergoing any censorship, will be embarked aboard,”
when it launched in 2003. Another one of these objects launched aboard the (+)
Voyager spacecraft in 1977 exists as two phonograph records containing 115 images
as well as audio samples of greetings spoken in 55 languages. The Voyager (*) Golden
Record is an example of, for the points, what memory box that contains present-day objects
to be opened in the future?

ANSWER: Time Capsules (accept Voyager Golden Record before mentioned; prompt on
“Capsules”; prompt on “Satellite”)

(13) This structure contains a nutritive tissue layer called the tapetum, and the
process of dehiscence releases microgametophytes from this structure, which
contains all the microsporangia (+) found within angiosperms. The androecium is a
collection of these structures, which each consist of a filament and an anther. The
pistil (*) is contrasted with, for the points, what pollen-producing structure, the male
reproductive organ of the flower?

ANSWER: Stamens (or Stamina; accept Androecium before mentioned; accept Anthers
before mentioned; prompt on "Flower")

(14) Along with yttrium and copper, this metal names a type of high-temperature
superconductor. This element gives fireworks their green color, and its most
common isotope has a mass number of (+) 138. Patients consume a drink containing
a sulfate of this element as a contrasting agent before undergoing radiographic (*)
examination. For the points, name this Group Two element symbolized Ba.

ANSWER: Barium (accept yttrium barium copper oxide; or YBCO; accept Barium Sulfate;
accept Ba alone before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                   Semifinals


(15) Cultural isolation can lead to this phenomenon, which explains why Ellis van
Creveld syndrome is common amongst the Amish community in the United States.
Ernst Mayr formulated this phenomenon, which is a type of (+) genetic drift, as
opposed to the bottleneck effect. The lack of genetic variation within a (*) population
can be caused by, for the points, what genetic effect that results when small group of
organisms start a new population after diverting from a larger population?

ANSWER: Founder Effect (prompt on “Genetic Drift” before mentioned)

(16) A polymer's glass transition can be quantified using the "differential scanning"
type of these devices, and constant volume is maintained in the "bomb" type of these
devices, which can more accurately measure a sample's (+) enthalpy of combustion. A
simple example of these devices can be constructed with a stirring rod, thermometer,
(*) and two nested styrofoam coffee cups. For the points, name these devices that measure
the heat given off by a chemical reaction.

ANSWER: Calorimeters (accept Calorimetry; accept Differential Scanning Calorimeters;
accept Bomb Calorimeters; accept Coffee Cup Calorimeters)

(17) This mathematician found six proofs of quadratic reciprocity. Complex
numbers that have both an integer real and imaginary part are known as this man’s
(+) “integers.” This mathematician names a probability distribution that resembles a
“bell curve.” According to legend, this man stunned his teacher by calculating the sum
of the first 100 positive (*) integers rapidly. For the points, give this mathematician, the
namesake of the normal distribution.

ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss (accept Gaussian integers; accept Gaussian Distribution; or
Laplace-Gauss Distribution)

(18) This Loss of Coolant Accident was rated a level seven on the International
Nuclear and Radiological Event scale, and was triggered by an earthquake. This
nuclear (+) disaster released roughly ten times less radiation than the accident at
Chernobyl and resulted in a full closure of an island (*) facility. For the points, name this
2011 nuclear reactor accident that took place in Japan after the Tōhoku tsunami and
earthquake.

ANSWER: Fukushima Daiichi accident (accept synonymous answers for "Accident" such as
"Disaster")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                 Semifinals


(19) The Heawood [[HAY-wood]] conjecture outlines the optimal way of doing this
process on different surfaces. A theorem about this process was proven in 1976 by
Kenneth (+) Appel and Wolfgang Haken, making it the first proof to use a computer.
In graph theory, the minimum number required to perform this process is the (*)
chromatic number. For the points, name this process of labeling a graph requiring only four
of the namesake properties.

ANSWER: Graph coloring (accept Graph labeling; accept four color theorem)

(20) Numbers that have this property but satisfy Fermat’s little theorem are known
as Carmichael numbers. It’s not pronic, but “rectangular numbers” are (+) numbers
with this property. The Sieve of Eratosthenes crosses these numbers out in its
algorithm. Numbers with this property have at least one other (*) divisor between one
and itself. For the points, give this property of a number which can be factored into the
product of two smaller numbers, the opposite of prime.

ANSWER: Composite Number

(21) This term is used to refer to a hypothetical situation where technological
development becomes uncontrollable or irreversible. A misapplication of general (+)
relativity to an infinite time in the past would predict the formation of an object
described by this term that contained all of the mass in the universe. (*) For the points,
give this term that refers to the infinitely dense center of a black hole.

ANSWER: singularity (accept technological singularity; accept gravitational singularity;
or spacetime singularity)

(22) The geometric mean theorem relates the length of one of these segments in a
triangle to the lengths of the segments it creates. The inverse (+) Pythagorean
theorem relates the length of these segments. These segments of a triangle coincide
at its orthocenter. The area of a triangle can be calculated by multiplying one-half (*)
times a base times one of these segments. For the points, name these segments drawn from
a vertex and perpendicular to the opposite side.

ANSWER: Triangle altitudes

(23) This phenomenon is responsible for the Ekman spiral, and its vertical
analogue is known as the Eötvös [[OHT-vohs]] effect. The National (+) Geographic
tested this phenomenon in an experiment where a person throws a ball to the person
in front of them while on a roundabout. Contrary to popular opinion, this effect does
not have an impact on the direction of toilet (*) flushing in different hemispheres. For
the points, name this effect that deflects objects while rotating, an effect caused by a
fictitious namesake force.

ANSWER: Coriolis Effect (or Coriolis Force)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                               Semifinals


(24) This process and its terminology is still commonly used despite our advances
in the understanding of the quantum-mechanical (+) nature of the atom. This process,
developed under the Bohr model of the atom, has to do with the arrangement of
certain particles into their (*) energy sublevels. For the points, name this process of
summarizing and arranging electrons into their orbitals, governed by concepts such as the
Aufbau principle.

ANSWER: Electron Configuration (accept Electronic Structure; prompt on descriptive
answers)

(25) This unit of measurement was named after the inventor of the five-bit teletype
code. In digital systems with binary (+) code, this unit of measurement is equivalent
to one bit per second. Conversely, in non-digital systems, the informational (*) size of
this unit of measurement varies. For the points, name this unit of measurement for the
symbol rate that determines the speed of communication over a particular channel.

ANSWER: Baud (prompt on "symbols per second" or "pulses per second")

(26) The lever rule can be applied to these diagrams after drawing their tie lines.
The Widom and Frenkel lines on these diagrams separate different parts of a (+)
supercritical fluid. The Clausius-Clapeyron equation is used to measure the slope of
the coexistence curves on these diagrams, which meet at the (*) triple point. For the
points, name these diagrams that plot temperature against pressure to show where a
substance exists as a solid, liquid, or gas.

ANSWER: phase diagrams (or P-T diagrams)

(27) This compound has the lowest melting point of any alkane. This molecule is
both the lightest and most major constituent of liquid (+) petroleum gas. The
combustion of this compound results in four molecules of water and three molecules
of carbon dioxide. This molecule contains one less carbon than (*) butane. For the
points, what compound with chemical formula C3H8 is commonly used in portable stoves?

ANSWER: Propane

(28) Orally active drugs have no more than five donors of these interactions
according to Lipinski’s rule. The secondary structure of proteins is determined by
these interactions. (+) These interactions are stronger than van der Waals forces but
weaker than covalent bonds. (*) These interactions hold together water molecules. For
the points, identify these bonds named for the first element on the Periodic Table.

ANSWER: hydrogen bonds (accept H-Bond)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                   Semifinals


(29) One form of this quantity is calculated as effective nuclear charge over the
covalent radius squared when using the Allred-Rochow (+) scale. Differences in this
quantity between atoms give rise to inductive effects. Cesium has the lowest value for
this quantity on the Pauling scale, which ranges from 0.8 (*) to 4.0 and increases
towards the top right of the periodic table. For the points, name this quantity, the tendency
of an atom to attract electrons.

ANSWER: electronegativity (accept word forms)

(30) Marian Smoluchowski proposed a theoretical perpetual motion machine
powered by this process called its namesake “ratchet”. In mathematics, this
phenomenon is modeled by the Wiener (+) Process, a stochastic one-dimensional
model of it. This phenomenon was the subject of the second of Albert Einstein’s Annus
Mirabilis papers, and was first observed by its namesake in (*) pollen grains in water.
For the points, name this random movement of particles in a fluid.

ANSWER: Brownian motion (accept pedesis, accept Brownian Ratchet; prompt on
“random walk”)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                  Semifinals


Extra Questions
(1)    Pebbles of this rock are nicknamed Apache tears. Gray spherulites at
crystallization sites in this rock define its "snowflake" variety. This rock, which is
often formed by (+) cooling polymerized felsic lava, contains few crystals due to its
viscosity. This extrusive igneous rock has a conchoidal [[kon-KOY-dul]] fracture that
makes it a common material for (*) scalpel blades. For the points, name this glossy black
volcanic glass.

ANSWER: Obsidian

(2)     An increased risk of developing this condition has been associated with the
FOXD3 gene, as well as variations of the NLRP1 and (+) PTPN22 genes. This condition
is classified as segmental or non-segmental, the latter of which can be further
classified into focal, acrofacial, and mucosal. Michael (*) Jackson notably suffered from,
for the points, what condition that occurs when the body stops producing melanin, leading
to patchy discolorations of the skin?

ANSWER: Vitiligo [[vih-tuh-"LIE"-goh]] (or Leucoderma; accept Segmental Vitiligo; accept
Non-segmental Vitiligo; accept Generalized Vitiligo; accept Universal Vitiligo; accept Focal
Vitiligo; accept Acrofacial Vitiligo; accept Mucosal Vitiligo)

(3)     The Sleeping Beauty system uses one of these sequences to splice genes into
vertebrate chromosomes. LINEs, SINEs, and Alu elements are examples of the (+)
"retro" type of these sequences, which act though a "copy and paste" mechanism with
an RNA intermediate. Barbara McClintock's studies of corn led to the discovery of
these "jumping (*) genes." For the points, name these DNA sequences which can change
their position within the genome.

ANSWER: transposons (or transposable elements; or TEs; accept retrotransposons;
accept jumping genes before mention but prompt afterwards)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 7



(MS) Science Bee Round 7
Regulation Tossups
(1)     This biological order has four of five species as members of the Tachyglossidae
genus. That genus of this order is divided into short-beaked and long-beaked species, with
those animals being called echidnas or spiny anteaters. This order is the smallest of the
three that form its class, alongside placentals and marsupials, and all extant species are
native to Australia. For the point, name this smallest order of mammals, which includes the
platypus and has egg-laying members.

ANSWER: Monotremes (or Monotremata)

(2)     Many moon rocks have a large concentration of one type of these minerals called
anorthite. Alkali types of these minerals have lower specific gravity than their plagioclase
and orthoclase types. A subclass of these minerals constitutes the continuous branch of
Bowen's reaction series, and a subclass of these minerals defines six on the Mohs hardness
scale. For the point, name this most abundant class of minerals in Earth's crust.

ANSWER: Feldspars (accept Plagioclase Feldspars; accept Orthoclase Feldspars; accept
Alkali Feldspars)

(3)     Like arthropods, members of this phylum utilize copper-based hemocyanins to
transport oxygen in the body. Members of this phylum possess a mantle that contains a
large cavity for feeding and excretion. Many members of this phylum possess a tongue-like
structure called a radula. Cephalopods, gastropods, and bivalves belong to, for the point,
what largest marine phylum of invertebrates that includes clams and snails?

ANSWER: Mollusca (or Molluscs)

(4)     X-bracing has been used for some of these structures in Chicago, while the trussed
tube concept was applied to examples of these structures like the Onterie Center. Tube
framing superseded the steel frame design of these structures, which were pioneered by
Fazlur Rahman Khan. These structures often make use of sky lobbies to expand service core
via elevators. For the point, name these towering buildings that include the Burj Khalifa.

ANSWER: Skyscrapers (accept Supertalls; prompt on "High-rises"; prompt on "Buildings")

(5)     Common types of these things use the molecule Tris along with EDTA, and include
the TAE and TBE varieties, which are often used during gel electrophoresis. In the human
body, a mixture of carbonic acid and bicarbonate form a system used to maintain the quality
of blood that acts as one of these entities. The pH of these solutions can be estimated via the
Henderson-Hasselbach equation. A weak acid and its conjugate base make up, for the point,
what solutions that can resist changes in pH level?

ANSWER: buffers (or buffer solution/agent)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 7


(6)    This software's original name was Freax, a portmanteau of "free", "freak", and "x".
Debian and Ubuntu are popular distributions of this software. This software originally
employed the EXT File System, though most modern distributions use EXT4. For the point,
name this Open-Source operating system, originally developed by Linus Torvalds, whose
mascot is a penguin named Tux.

ANSWER: Linux (accept GNU/Linux; prompt on "Unix")

(7)     Individuals infected with this disease may exhibit Bannwarth syndrome. The
bacterium that causes this disease come from the genus Borrelia, and those spirochete
[["SPY"-roh-keet]] class bacteria makes this disease hard to treat by creating a biofilm that
allows it to hide within many areas of the body. A bull's-eye pattern rash is a common
symptom of, for the point, what vector-borne disease that is contracted from the bite of a
deer tick?

ANSWER: Lyme Disease (accept Lyme Borreliosis; accept Lyme Neuroborreliosis; prompt
on "Borrelia" before mentioned; do not accept or prompt on "Rocky Mountain Spotted
Fever")

(8)     A relation named for a letter describing this quantity and sigma describes black
holes. Luminosity is proportional to this quantity to the 3.5 power for main-sequence stars.
Low values of this quantity for a star never enter the asymptotic giant branch of stellar
evolution. Units for this quantity are often expressed in terms of the Sun. For the point,
name this quantity of how much matter a star contains.

ANSWER: Stellar mass (prompt on “M” or “M-sigma relation”)

(9)     Manhattan plots can represent "association studies" named for these things, which
link nucleotide variation to disease traits. The first complete map of one of these things for a
eukaryote was created for Baker's yeast. James Watson led a project that used high-
throughput sequencing to map these things for Homo sapiens. For the point, what term
refers to the entire genetic sequence of an organism?

ANSWER: Genome (accept Human Genome Project; accept Genome-wide Association
Studies; prompt on "genes" or "DNA")

(10) This operation describes the runtime for the fastest known algorithm that solves the
traveling salesman problem. This operation is performed on "cos(x) + i sin(x)" in De
Moivre’s [[deh MWAHVS]] formula. This operation’s second input is nt in the compound
interest formula. When this operation has a base of two, it is the same as doubling. For the
point, name this operation that multiplies a number by itself.

ANSWER: Exponentiation (or Exponential; accept Power)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 7


(11) In Conway's Game of Life, the boat, long tail, and glider occupy this number of cells.
This Wilson prime is also the third Catalan number and the fifth of the Fibonacci numbers.
This number appears under the square root in the numerator of the golden number, and
this number is also the value of the hypotenuse of the smallest Pythagorean triple. For the
point, identify this number, the atomic number of boron, as well as the total sides in a
pentagon.

ANSWER: Five

(12) Objects from this region are disrupted by a dwarf star every 27 million years,
according to the Nemesis hypothesis. The inner part of this location is sometimes called the
Hills cloud, and the dwarf planet Sedna is located in this region beyond the Kuiper [[KY-
per]] Belt. For the point, name this proposed location for the source of long-period comets,
named for a Dutch astronomer.

ANSWER: Ӧpik-Oort Cloud

(13) The transition between minerals rich in sodium and minerals rich in this element
make up the continuous branch of Bowen’s reaction series. Along with magnesium, this
metal is present in dolomite, and it is also found in aragonite and calcite. This element’s
carbonate makes up the shells of many marine animals. A metal found in limestone, this is,
for the point, what element, the main constituent of bone?

ANSWER: Calcium (or Ca)

(14) This scientist failed to determine the shape of DNA by proposing a triple-helical
model. In 1954, this scientist won a Nobel Peace Prize for his opposition to weapons of mass
destruction. To treat heart disease and prevent colds, this scientist controversially
advocated for megadoses of vitamin C. Electronegativity is measured within a range from
0.7 to 4 on a scale named after, for the point, what American chemist who wrote The Nature
of the Chemical Bond?

ANSWER: Linus Pauling (or Linus Carl Pauling; accept Pauling Scale)

(15) Laura Ingalls Wilder wrote The Long Winter detailing her and her family’s efforts to
survive during one of these events. The Storm of the Century caused one of these natural
events to occur in March 1993. The National Weather Service states wind speeds must be
greater than or equal to 35 miles per hour in order to be, for the point, what type of severe,
prolonged snowstorm?

ANSWER: Blizzard (accept Ground Blizzard; prompt on "Snow" or "Snowstorm")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 7


(16) The Ukok Plateau is one of the last remnants of this animal's namesake steppe, and
resources from this animal were used to make the Venus of Brassempouy and Lion-Man
statues. A handful of isolated populations of this animal on St. Paul Island and Wrangel
Island survived until 4,000 years ago, and a frozen specimen of this animal was discovered
at Yukagir. For the point, name this tusked, furry creature that roamed the earth during the
last Ice Age.

ANSWER: Wooly Mammoths (accept Mammuthus primigenius; prompt on partial
answers; do not accept or prompt on answers mentioning elephants)

(17) Under D'Alembert's [[dah-lem-BARES]] paradox, this force disappears within an
incompressible and inviscid flow. At very low Reynolds numbers, the magnitude of this
force on a spherical object is proportional to fluid velocity according to Stokes' law. Gravity
balances this upward-acting force when a falling object reaches terminal velocity. For the
point, name this force that opposes the motion of an object through a fluid.

ANSWER: drag force (accept air resistance; or fluid resistance; prompt on "friction")

(18) The Dongfanghong I was the first of this kind of object launched by China as part of
its "Two Bombs, One [this object]" campaign. Celestial bodies like Europa and Ganymede
are considered the "natural" kind of this object and surround Jupiter. Artificial examples of
these objects include the Soviet Sputnik 1. For the point, name these objects that orbit
larger bodies.

ANSWER: Satellites (accept natural satellites; or artificial satellites)

(19) Increases in the frequency of this phenomenon can be used to predict microbursts.
The Miller-Urey experiment tested whether this phenomenon led to the first organic
compounds on earth. St. Elmo’s fire can be produced by this phenomenon, whose "ball"
variety may be explained by the soliton hypothesis. This phenomenon occurs when the
atmospheric field strength exceeds three million volts per meter. For the point, name this
phenomenon seen during thunderstorms.

ANSWER: Lightning (accept ball lightning)

(20) This scale’s namesake worked with James Joule to discover an effect regarding the
throttling of a non-ideal gas. In 2019, this scale was recalibrated around Boltzmann’s
constant. A constant term of about 273 is used to convert this scale's measures to Celsius,
and this scale is named for the title held by physicist William Thompson. For the point,
name this temperature scale that starts at absolute zero.

ANSWER: Kelvin Scale
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 7


(21) This effect disagrees with classical electromagnetism and, in practical
experimentation, this effect illustrates that the removal of negatively charged particles from
a material surface occurs only when incident rays of light exceed a certain frequency
regardless of change in intensity. Albert Einstein used this effect to explain the particle
nature of light. For the point, name this phenomenon in which light emits electrons when
hitting certain materials.

ANSWER: Photoelectric Effect

(22) The length of this quantity over two is the minimum distance between antipodal
points. Arc length can be calculated by multiplying this quantity by theta over 360. The
constant tau is equal to the ratio between this quantity and the radius, and this quantity can
be estimated by multiplying the diameter by 22 over 7. For the point, give this term for the
distance around a circle.

ANSWER: Circumference

(23) Ronald Fisher analyzed this man’s data using statistics and determined that it was
“too good to be true.” One law named after this man states that alleles for separate traits are
passed independently of one another. This scientist coined the terms “dominant” and
“recessive” for the expression of traits and developed the laws of segregation and
independent assortment. For the point, name this scientist whose experiments on pea
plants provided the foundation of genetics.

ANSWER: Gregor Mendel (or Gregor Johann Mendel)

(24) The dorsal face of this joint contains a triangular depression called the anatomical
snuff box. The scaphoid, pisiform, and hamate are among the eight bones found in this
ellipsoid joint, which attaches to both the ulnar and radial collateral ligaments. Repeated
compression of the median nerve that passes through this joint causes carpal tunnel
syndrome. For the point, name this joint that connects the arm to the hand.

ANSWER: Wrist (accept Radiocarpal Joint before "carpal" is mentioned)

(25) Solvents in this phase of matter are used to partition solutes in the most common
form of extraction. The HPLC type of chromatography uses a pressurized solvent in this
phase, which also names the crystalline materials used in TV displays. This phase is
bypassed by substances that undergo deposition and sublimation. At room temperature,
bromine and mercury exist as, for the point, what state of matter?

ANSWER: Liquid (accept Liquid Crystals; accept Liquid-liquid Extraction)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                          Round 7


(26) The location of this body's orbital resonances corresponds to Kirkwood gaps. A
system on this planet found between two jet streams was found to move in an anticyclonic
manner in time-lapse photos from Voyager 1. A massive storm called the Great Red Spot is
found on this planet, whose moons include Ganymede and Europa. Most asteroids are found
between Mars and, for the point, what largest planet in the Solar System?

ANSWER: Jupiter

(27) One of these entities named for its wheel-like shape contains the surface proteins
VP4 and VP7 which induce the neutralization of antibodies. The Baltimore system is used to
classify these entities, which typically replicate using the lytic [[lih-tik]] or lysogenic cycle.
Reverse transcriptase is used by the “retro” type of these infectious agents, which require
host cells to reproduce. Bacteriophages [[bak-TEE-ree-oh-FAY-juz]] are a type of, for the
point, what pathogens that can cause Ebola, chicken pox, and the flu?

ANSWER: Viruses (accept Retroviruses; accept Rotaviruses; accept either Bacteriophages
or Phages before “Bacteriophages” is mentioned)

(28) Along with the disease called flacherie, this man found that Nosema parasites
afflicted silkworms eggs in a disease called pébrine. This scientist found that nothing would
grow in nutrient broth unless it was exposed to the air, thereby rejecting the theory of
spontaneous generation and providing evidence for germ theory. For the point, name this
French chemist and microbiologist, who developed a namesake process of heating certain
foods and beverages to destroy pathogens.

ANSWER: Louis Pasteur (accept Pasteurization)

(29) This is the heaviest particle created in beta-plus decay. “Thermal” and “slow” types
of these particles are produced in nuclear reactors. Isotopes of elements are caused by
differing amounts of these particles. These baryons are composed of one up quark and two
down quarks. For the point, name these particles found with protons in atomic nuclei and
which possess no electric charge.

ANSWER: Neutrons

(30) Scientists studying this phenomenon rely on the Doppler shift in Platform
Transmitter Terminals as well as using other methods such as radio-tracking collars. The
“great” [this phenomenon] is exhibited by wildebeests, and the Sierra Madre Mountains in
Mexico is the target destination of monarch butterflies after performing this 3,000-mile
phenomenon from Canada. For the point, name this phenomenon animals exhibit when they
move to another location in response to a change in their environment.

ANSWER: Migration (accept Great Migration)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 7


Extra Questions
(1)      Some plants in this biome have adapted to utilizing CAM photosynthesis or C4
carbon fixation to minimize the rate of transpiration. Features like ergs and oases can be
found in this biome that can be formed by the rain shadow effect or weathering processes.
The Gobi and Sahara are examples of, for the point, what type of biome characterized by
little precipitation and arid climate?

ANSWER: deserts

(2)     Simon Baron-Cohen conducted the "Sally-Anne test" on children with this condition
and proposed that people with it have "extreme male brain." Researchers have mostly
rejected the theory that this condition is caused by "broken" mirror neurons. People with
this disorder often struggle to respond to cues for joint attention and can be non-verbal. For
the point, name this disorder characterized by difficulty in communication, whose forms
include Asperger's.

ANSWER: Autism spectrum disorder (accept ASD; accept Kanner Autism; or Classic
Autism; prompt on "Asperger's")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Round 6



(MS) Science Bee Round 6
Regulation Tossups
(1)      The kudzu variety of this plant, which is native to Japan, is referred to as the
“invasive [this plant] that ate the south” since it prevents the photosynthesis of other
grasses and trees by stealing their sunlight. Hormones such as jasmonates and indole-3-
acetic acid mediate the coiling action exhibited by tendrils which have adhesive pads that
assist this plant in climbing. Grapes grow on, for the point, what long, nonwoody plants that
use neighboring plants and structures for support?

ANSWER: Vines (accept Kudzu Vines; accept Gravevines)

(2)     Georg Cantor names one of these mathematical objects, which lacks density and
contains only boundary points. The intersection of two disjointed forms of these objects
yields the empty one of them. These objects, which are "null" when they have no elements,
do not include any repeated elements. For the point, name these collections of elements
typically written with curly brackets that can be depicted using Venn diagrams.

ANSWER: Sets (accept Cantor Sets; accept Empty Sets; accept Null Sets)

(3)      This system was developed at the same time as GLONASS, which suffered from
incomplete coverage. Lockheed Martin designed objects as part of Block Three, which
enable this system to work. The time of transmission and time of arrival are broadcast by
this system's satellites. The United States Space Force operates, for the point, what system
that allows users to navigate the globe?

ANSWER: Global Positioning System (or GPS)

(4)    This botanist earned his doctorate from the University of Harderwijk [[har-dehr-
WEEK]], where he wrote a dissertation hypothesizing that malaria only appeared in areas
with clay-rich soils. This scientist established a botanical garden while serving as the
Professor of Medicine at Uppsala University in Sweden. For the point, name this “father of
modern taxonomy” who formalized binomial nomenclature.

ANSWER: Carolus Linnaeus (or Carl von Linné)

(5)     An outbreak of this condition in Australia resulted in the discovery of congenital
cataracts in infants born to mothers diagnosed with this disease. This disease, also known
as "three-day measles", can be prevented through a vaccine whose name is in conjunction
with the measles and mumps. Primarily transmitted through airborne droplets from an
infected individual, this is, for the point, what contagious infection caused by an eponymous
virus that produces a red rash, a condition also known as German measles?

ANSWER: Rubella (accept German Measles before mentioned, accept Three-day Measles
before mentioned; do not accept "Measles")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 6


(6)     The preliminary stages of using this device see the administration of either a CQT or
a GKT. “General state” and “specific point” are two countermeasures of this device, the latter
of which may include physical measures such as pinching one’s own skin or biting one's
own tongue. A person’s skin conductance response, respiration, and heart rate are
measured in, for the point, what device, typically used by law enforcement to assess a
person’s veracity based on their answers to a series of questions?

ANSWER: Polygraph Test (or Lie Detector Test)

(7)      Some animals performing this behavior use the lek system, which is a group
performance that is typically displayed by birds. Other birds, such as the bowerbird, express
this behavior by forming elaborate structures made up of twigs covered with bones and
shells, while the birds of paradise exhibit this behavior by refining a dance inherited from
their fathers. For the point, name this behavior animals exhibit when searching for mates.

ANSWER: Mating (accept synonymous answers; accept Reproductive Tactics; accept
Courtship; prompt on "Polygyny", "Polygamy", and "Monogamy")

(8)     Some fluvial-dominated types of these locations are characterized by homopycnal
flows, in which river water mixes with basin water. Hypercynal flows characterize these
landforms, which are formed by river water depositing sedimentary rock as turbidites. The
Tocantins river meets the Amazon at one of these landforms. For the point, name these
features that form from deposited sediments in locations where rivers meet another body
of water.

ANSWER: River Delta

(9)     This is the simplest molecule that can undergo pi-pi stacking. The prefixes "ortho",
"meta", and "para" describe positions on this molecule in most EAS reactions, including the
Friedel-Crafts reaction that adds an alkyl group onto it. A hydroxyl group is added to this
molecule to produce phenol. This simplest aromatic molecule is often drawn as a hexagon
around a circle. For the point, name this molecule whose formula is C6H6.

ANSWER: benzene (accept C6H6 before mention)

(10) The Leviathan Patera is a large cryovolcanic system on this celestial body, which
was discovered in 1846 by William Lassell. This moon has the lowest average temperature
of all known objects in the Solar System. Due to its retrograde orbit, it is believed this moon
may have once been a Pluto-like dwarf planet made of mostly frozen nitrogen. For the point,
name this largest moon of Neptune.

ANSWER: Triton
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Round 6


(11) One of these compounds reacts with a carboxylic acid in the Fischer esterification. In
IR spectroscopy, these compounds show a broad peak at 3300 inverse centimeters due to
their hydrogen bonding. Permanent blindness can result from consuming the "wood" type
of these compounds. For the point, name these compounds with a hydroxyl group, which
include ethanol and an isopropyl type used as a disinfectant.

ANSWER: alcohols

(12) A hybrid algorithm that performs this task is named after Tim Peters. One algorithm
for this task relies on partitioning data around a pivot and then calling itself recursively. The
“insertion” and “selection” forms of algorithms for this task typically have the worst
runtime. The concept of stability is most often applied to algorithms for this task, which the
“quick” form notably lacks. For the point, name this task of putting elements of a list in
order.

ANSWER: Sorting (accept Timsort; accept Insertion Sort; accept Selection Sort; accept
Quick Sort)

(13) An early mathematics textbook from this country that discussed bounding fields and
proportions is titled The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art. The first seismometers
were developed in this country, as well as the first compasses made of lodestone. Early blast
furnaces were developed in this country by Du Shi. For the point, name this country, which
produced many technological developments during the Han Dynasty.

ANSWER: China (or Zhōngguó; accept People’s Republic of China; or Zhōnghuá Rénmín
Gònghéguó; or PRC; accept Imperial China)

(14) This substance's OIP estimation is found by multiplying porosity, saturation, and
volume. Catalytic reforming converts an intermediate of this substance called naphtha
[[NAF-thuh]] into liquid reformates. This substance, which can be cracked and broken down
into petrochemicals, is often extracted alongside brine and natural gas via fracking. For the
point, name this liquid fossil fuel which is refined into diesel fuel and gasoline.

ANSWER: Petroleum (accept Crude oil; prompt on "Oil" or "Petrol" or "Gasoline"; prompt
on "Hydrocarbons")

(15) This type of relationship can be characterized by a Pearson correlation coefficient
value of one or a negative one. Cramer's rule can be used to find a solution to a system of
these types of equations, which can also be solved via Gauss-Jordan elimination or
substitution. For the point, name this term that describes polynomials with degree one that
have constant slope, examples of which include the line y equals three x plus one.

ANSWER: linear (accept linear equations)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                    Round 6


(16) The Green-Tao Theorem states that one can find arbitrarily long arithmetic
sequences of these numbers. According to the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, every
positive integer greater than one can be expressed as the unique product of these numbers,
which can be computed using the Sieve of Eratosthenes [[ehr-uh-TOSS-thuh-neez]]. 2, 3,
and 5 are examples of, for the point, what numbers, often contrasted with composite
numbers, that are only divisible by 1 and themself?

ANSWER: Prime Numbers

(17) This organelle contains the proteins fibrillarin and nucleophosmin. Proteins are
detained and immobilized in this organelle, a process known as its namesake detention.
RNA polymerases one and three transcribe ribosomal RNA inside this organelle. The
assembly of ribosomes begins in, for the point, what dense structure, the largest spherical
component of the nucleus?

ANSWER: Nucleolus (accept Nucleolar Detention; prompt on "Nucleus")

(18) The properties of this substance control the composition of organisms in edaphic
communities. High precipitation can cause eluviation, or leaching, within this substance.
Pedogenesis is the process of forming this substance, which is arranged into O, A, B, and C
horizons. Decayed organic matter within this substance is called humus. Clay, sand, and silt
make up, for the point, what material in which plants grow?

ANSWER: soil (accept dirt; accept earth; accept topsoil)

(19) The regions between these geologic features can contain depressed and raised areas
known as grabens and horsts. The hanging wall lies above the plane of one of these features
in the “normal” type, while the “reverse” type of these features sees the footwall above the
plane. Types of these structures include dip-slip and strike-slip. For the point, name these
planar fractures in rock, of which a notable one is named after San Andreas.

ANSWER: Faults (accept normal fault; accept reverse fault; accept dip-slip fault; accept
strike-slip fault; accept San Andreas Fault)

(20) These objects can be classified as carbonaceous, silicate, or metal-rich. The Late
Heavy Bombardment was marked by a large number of collisions involving planets and
these objects. In 2014, water vapor was detected on one of these objects named Ceres, while
other examples in the same location include Vesta. For the point, name these bodies that
exist between Mars and Jupiter in a namesake “belt.”

ANSWER: Asteroids (accept Asteroid Belt)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 6


(21) This quantity is an imaginary number in Tachyonic [[TAK-yon-ick]] Fields. Two
different types of this quantity are equated in Einstein's equivalence principle. This quantity
is zero for particles such as photons and gluons, and the gravitational force between two
bodies is proportional to the product of this quantity for both. For the point, name this
quantity measured in kilograms.

ANSWER: Mass (accept Imaginary Mass; or Gravitational Mass; or Inertial Mass)

(22) These structures are visualized using G-banding, which uses Giemsa stain to
produce a karyotype. Synapsis is the physical pairing of these structures with two arms
labeled "p" and "q." Spindle fibers attach to these structures at the kinetochore, which
assembles onto the centromere during mitosis. Human diploid cells have 23 pairs of, for the
point, what structures containing densely packed DNA?

ANSWER: Chromosomes (accept Chromatids; prompt on "Centromere" before mentioned)

(23) This quantity for a loop times its area is equal to the magnitude of the magnetic
dipole moment of the loop. The total sum of this quantity flowing into a node must equal the
total sum of this quantity flowing out of it, according to Kirchhoff’s junction rule. Electrical
power is the product of voltage and this quantity. For the point, name this quantity, equal to
voltage over resistance by Ohm’s law.

ANSWER: Electric Current (prompt on “I”)

(24) To estimate this quantity, Clair Patterson used lead-lead dating of objects named for
Canyon Diablo. To determine this value, one scientist neglected convection and nuclear
processes, leading Thomas Huxley to declare that value was magnitudes too small. Lord
Kelvin was the first to devise this quantity, which has been calculated using meteorites and
zircon deposits. For the point, name this quantity relating to our planet, which is estimated
to be about 4.5 billion years.

ANSWER: Age of the Earth

(25) Catastrophic examples of this phenomenon created large formations such as Dry
Falls and are often named for Missoula. A type of this phenomenon called jökulhlaup [[yo-
KOOL-lahp]] results from volcanic subglacial eruptions or geothermal heating. Glacial
retreats can result in examples of this phenomenon, including one that carved out the
Columbia River Gorge. For the point, name this phenomenon in which ice dams melt,
leading to an overflow of water.

ANSWER: Floods (accept Glacial Floods)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 6


(26) Clumps of rough endoplasmic reticulum in these cells are known as Nissl bodies,
and these cells are supported by oligodendrocytes, a type of glial cell. The Law of Dynamic
Polarization in these cells was formulated by Santiago Cajal [[kah-HALL]], who advanced
the idea that these cells are the functional units of the nervous system. Schwann cells, axons,
and dendrites are parts of, for the point, what cells in the body that send and receive
electrical and chemical signals?

ANSWER: Neurons (or Nerve Cells)

(27) The young of these animals are called crias, and their enameled teeth differentiate
these vertebrates from the similar vicuña. The ccara and tapada are breeds of this relative
of the guanaco with wool of varying thickness. This animal is the largest camelid in the
Western Hemisphere. For the point, name these domesticated pack animals of South
America, a larger cousin of the alpaca.

ANSWER: Llama (accept Alpaca before "enameled teeth")

(28) Mergez is a third magnitude star in this entity, and in Malaysia and Indonesia, this
constellation is identified as a boat or canoe. A technique involving drawing an imaginary
line through this entity's stars of Merak and Dubne is used to find Polaris. For the point,
name this pattern of stars that look like a bowl with a handle, comprising seven bright stars
of the Ursa Major constellation.

ANSWER: Big Dipper (accept the Plough; prompt on "Ursa Major" before mentioned; do
not accept or prompt on "Little Dipper")

(29) This galaxy is surrounded by a ringlike filament of stars that wraps around it three
times. That ring surrounding this galaxy is the Monoceros Ring, which may have been torn
off nearby Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy. This galaxy and the Andromeda galaxy are the two
main constituents of the Local Group. The Orion Arm is a component of, for the point, what
galaxy that contains the solar system?

ANSWER: Milky Way Galaxy

(30) Robert Chambers published an anonymous book that shifted public opinion about
this general theory. An 1859 work that advanced this theory rejected the conclusions of
William Paley's Natural Theology. The idea of giraffes stretching their necks to reach high
leaves was a faulty explanation of this theory by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck. For the point, name
this theory of "descent with modification," which was proposed by Charles Darwin through
natural selection.

ANSWER: Evolution (accept Natural selection; prompt on "survival of the fittest")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 6


Extra Questions
(1)     Severo Ochoa won the 1959 Nobel Prize in Medicine for discovering an enzyme that
could synthesize this molecule. Recent studies have shown that the "micro" variety of this
molecule plays a role in regulating cancer metabolism. Examples of this molecule include its
"heterogenous nuclear", "transfer", and "messenger" varieties. Uracil replaces thymine in,
for the point, what nucleic acid, that, unlike DNA, is single-stranded and made up of a ribose
sugar?

ANSWER: RNA (or ribonucleic acid; accept microRNA; or miRNA; accept transferRNA; or
tRNA; accept messengerRNA; or mRNA; accept heterogenous nuclear RNA; or hnRNA;
prompt on "nucleic acid")

(2)     One system that classifies this concept was developed by Charles Warren
Thornthwaite in 1931. The earth’s movements are described by Milankovitch cycles, which
describe the effects its eccentricity and tilt have on this concept. This concept is classified
based on five characteristic vegetations, including rainforest, grassland, and desert. For the
point, name this concept that describes long-term weather patterns in a particular area.

ANSWER: Climate (accept Thornwaite Climate Classification system; prompt on “Weather”
before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                          Round 5



(MS) Science Bee Round 5
Regulation Tossups
(1)     Zosimus of Panopolis, who advanced the idea of chrysopoeia [[kry-soh-poh-EH-uh]],
was an early adherent of this practice. "Internal" and "external" types of this early practice
were included in Daoist texts. Despite devising his namesake law, Robert Boyle practiced
this discipline, believing that salt, sulfur, and mercury are the true "principles of things." For
the point, name this protoscientific practice, the goals of which included creating the
philosophers' stone.

ANSWER: Alchemy (accept descriptive answers including turning objects into Gold)

(2)     Edwin Chadwick supported one of these systems with a velocity-augmenting design.
The Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw the construction of one of these structures in
London. The effluent type of these systems, often abbreviated STEG, have small diameter
pipes, and items are transported through these systems to namesake treatment centers to
remove contaminants. Septic Tank Effluent Pumping and Septic Tank Effluent Gravity are
types of, for the point, what typically underground structures that carry wastewater?

ANSWER: Sewers (accept Sewer Systems; accept Sanitary Sewers; accept Septic Tank
Effluent Pumping before mentioned; accept Septic Tank Effluent Gravity before mentioned)

(3)     This mathematician is the first namesake of a constant also known as gamma and
equal to about 0.577. This mathematician solved the Basel problem by utilizing a power
series. This man names a formula relating the exponential of complex numbers to
trigonometric functions. The base of the natural logarithm is, for the point, a number named
for which mathematician, symbolized e?

ANSWER: Leonhard Euler (accept Euler's Formula; prompt on "E")

(4)     Components within this cellular structure include two calcium ion release channels
inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptors and ryanodine receptors. One form of these cellular
structures is connected by helical sheets called Terasaki ramps, and these structures are
composed of flatted sacs called cisternae. Connected with the nuclear envelope, this is, for
the point, what organelle that is responsible for the regulation of protein synthesis, whose
"smooth" type is characterized by its lack of ribosomes?

ANSWER: Endoplasmic Reticulum (or ER; accept Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum; accept
Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum; accept Sarcoplasmic Reticulum)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 5


(5)      Proofs of this formula include the "dissection and rearrangement" method or the
use of trapezoids, which was developed by President James Garfield. The distance formula
in Cartesian coordinates is derived from this formula, solutions for which include namesake
triples such as 6, 8, and 10. The hypotenuse of a triangle can be computed by, for the point,
what formula named for a Greek mathematician that states that a-squared plus b-squared
equals c-squared?

ANSWER: Pythagorean Theorem

(6)     The molecule IPTG mimics this sugar by releasing a DNA-bound repressor. The
metabolism of this sugar is induced by cyclic AMP binding to the catabolite activator
protein, and this sugar is broken down by the enzyme beta-gal, which is expressed by a
polycistronic system with Z, Y, and A structural genes. In E. coli, the metabolism of this sugar
is controlled by a namesake operon that cleaves it into glucose and galactose. For the point,
name this sugar found in milk.

ANSWER: Lactose (accept Lac Operon; accept Allolactose)

(7)     This shape’s namesake numbers are generated by the formula “n times 3n minus 1
all over 2.” This shape contains as many diagonals as it does sides. Each internal angle of a
regular one of this polygon measures 108 degrees. For the point, name this type of polygon
which has five sides.

ANSWER: Pentagon

(8)    Some of these natural structures in Rotomahana field were destroyed by the
eruption of New Zealand’s Mount Tarawera. An example of these natural formations is
located beside the Hvítá River of Iceland. That formation of this type. known as the
Strokkur, has a clear conduit and has been erupting constantly since 1969. For the point,
name this type of spring that intermittently ejects steam and boiling water.

ANSWER: Geyser

(9)     The Moho discontinuity forms the boundary between this region and what lies
below it, and the brittle-ductile transition zone divides this region's upper and lower areas.
This region forms the uppermost boundary of the lithosphere, and isostatic equilibrium is
the process by which this region floats over the mantle. For the point, name this outermost
layer of the Earth.

ANSWER: Earth's Crust
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 5


(10) The sum of all values of this quantity in a circuit is governed by Kirchhoff's loop rule.
This quantity is produced across a conductor in the Hall effect. Power equals this quantity
times current. For a capacitor, charge is equal to capacitance times this quantity, and it is
equal to current times resistance in Ohm’s law. For the point, name this quantity, the
difference in electric potential between two points, symbolized V.

ANSWER: Voltage (accept electric pressure; accept electric tension; accept electric
potential difference before mentioned)

(11) This adjective and the word "cold" refers to an entity that may be explained by
particles called WIMPs. Fritz Zwicky proposed an entity named for this adjective after
observing the Coma Cluster. Phantom energy, a type of one quantity named for this
adjective, may explain the Big Rip hypothesis. About 68 percent of the universe may be
made of an "energy" described by this word. For the point, name this word that describes an
unobservable form of matter.

ANSWER: Dark (accept Dark energy; accept Dark matter; accept Cold Dark Matter)

(12) A "meso" type of these entities range in size from mesoscale beta to microscale.
Polar lows and nor'easters are examples of these entities, which can also be found on other
planets, such as the Great Red Spot on Jupiter. Depending on their location, these entities
can be known as hurricanes and typhoons. For the point, name these air masses that rotate
around a center of low atmospheric pressure called the eye.

ANSWER: Cyclones (accept Mesocyclone; prompt on "hurricane" or "typhoon")

(13) This man discussed the area of a parabola and the volume of a sphere in a letter to
Eratosthenes called The Method of Mechanical Theorems. This man tried to calculate the
number of sand grains that could fit in the universe in The Sand Reckoner. His namesake
principle states that the weight displaced by an object in a fluid equals the buoyant force on
it. For the point, name this Greek mathematician from Syracuse notable for shouting
"Eureka!"

ANSWER: Archimedes of Syracuse

(14) A super variant of this entity created by Samy Kankar could track even anonymous
TOR users, and their risk is mitigated by the Public Suffix List. Lou Montoulli coined this
term to describe entities that can record browsing histories of users and store passwords
and usernames on their devices. For the point, name these small blocks of data created by a
web server while browsing the web, named after a popular baked snack.

ANSWER: Cookies (accept Web Cookies; or HTTP Cookies; or Internet Cookies; or
Browser Cookies; or Authentication Cookies; or Tracking Cookies; or Super Cookies)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Round 5


(15) A hydrogen-based type of this phenomenon is used in a common "ionization
detector" for gas chromatography. The simplest type of emission spectroscopy observes the
color given off by samples exposed to this phenomenon, which produces yellow for sodium
and bright white for magnesium. This phenomenon is produced in laboratory settings using
a Bunsen burner. For the point, name this phenomenon given off by combustion reactions.

ANSWER: flames (or fire; accept flame test; accept flame ionization detector; prompt on
"heat")

(16) This element was first isolated by Henri Moissan through electrolysis. This
element’s existence was first theorized by André-Marie Ampère in 1810, and this halogen
exists by itself as a diatomic element. This element is the most electromagnetic and
therefore reacts strongly to all elements, except argon, neon, and xenon. Commonly found in
toothpaste, this is, for the point, what element used as an additive in tap water with the
atomic symbol F?

ANSWER: Fluorine (accept F before mentioned)

(17) This disease and frontotemporal dementia are both caused by the CHCHD10,
SQSTM1, and TBK1 genes, and are linked with the abnormal presence of the TDP-43 protein.
One moniker of this disease is derived from its discoverer, Jean-Martin Charcot, while a
more common moniker derives its name from a New York Yankees first baseman who died
in 1941. Stephen Hawking suffered from, for the point, what progressive neurodegenerative
muscle disorder also known as Lou Gehrig’s Disease?

ANSWER: ALS (or Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis; accept Motor Neuron Disease; accept
Charcot’s Disease; accept Lou Gehrig’s Disease before mentioned)

(18) Medical knowledge was mixed with spells in documents from this civilization
named for Ebers, Edwin Smith, and London Medical. Hippocrates and Galen studied this
civilization's early medicine, including fruit-derived ointments, at the temple of one of its
rulers. Despite advances in dental technology, this civilization's Queen Hatsheput died from
an abscess following a tooth extraction. For the point, name this ancient civilization whose
early science was advanced thanks to the patronage of the pharaohs.

ANSWER: Ancient Egypt (accept Kemet; or km.t; prompt on "Black Land")

(19) In this process, Okazaki fragments are joined by ligase to synthesize the lagging
strand, and this process occurs during the S phase of the cell cycle. The Meselson-Stahl
experiment proved that this process was semi-conservative, and PCR is an example of this
process occurring on a massive scale. For the point, name this process in which DNA is
copied onto a new strand.

ANSWER: DNA Replication
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Round 5


(20) Examples of these objects include the North America type and the Westerhout Five,
the latter of which is often paired with the neighboring Heart type of these objects as the
“Heart and Soul." Subclasses of these objects include the emission and reflection types, and
the Crab type found in Taurus is an example of the supernova remnant subclass of these
objects. For the point, name these massive cosmic clouds primarily made of gas and dust.

ANSWER: Nebulae (accept Emission Nebulae; accept Reflection Nebulae; accept Dark
Nebulae; accept Planetary Nebulae; accept Supernova Remnant before mentioned)

(21) A type of chromatography named after this material separates colored chemicals. A
wooden frame called a “deckle” is used in the manufacturing of this material. Machines that
produce this material have sections termed “wet end” and “dry end.” Litmus stains this
material in a common acid-base indicator. For the point, name this material made of pulp,
which comes in sizes like legal and A4.

ANSWER: Paper (accept paper chromatography; accept litmus paper; accept copy paper)

(22) This body moves in the direction of the Cygnus constellation and contains features
that can be predicted by Spörer's law. NASA's Pioneer program engineered the first
satellites for long-term observation of this object, which caused a geomagnetic storm during
the Carrington Event. This entity, which is classified as G-type main-sequence, contains an
outermost layer made of plasma known as the corona. For the point, name this star at the
center of our solar system.

ANSWER: Sun (accept Sol)

(23) One form of this quantity can be calculated from enthalpy and temperature by the
Clausius-Clapeyron equation, that is the “vapor” form. Amonton’s law correlates this
quantity with temperature. Dalton’s law equates the sum of the “partial” forms of this
quantity to the “total” form in a system. For the point, name this quantity measured in
pascals, the force per unit area.

ANSWER: Pressure (accept Vapor Pressure; accept Partial Pressure)

(24) Homology-directed repair via CRISPR can be used to introduce these phenomena
into a target sequence that can be prevented by Wobble-base pairing. Substitution of valine
for glutamic acid is caused by one of these events and results in sickle cell anemia, while
another type has no effect on phenotype. Point and frameshift are examples of, for the point,
what process that results in the change of DNA sequence in an organism?

ANSWER: mutation (accept word forms)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 5


(25) This scientist co-names the second law of photochemistry with Johannes Stark. One
quantity introduced by this scientist is symbolized lambda and represents the expansion of
the universe, though he later deemed it his “biggest blunder.” Gravitational lensing is
explained by a “general” form of a theory proposed by this scientist. For the point, name this
German-born physicist who originated two theories of relativity.

ANSWER: Albert Einstein (accept Einstein-Stark Law)

(26) This organ’s sinoatrial node is located near the superior vena cava, and its activity is
recorded by an EKG. Purkinje fibers conduct action potentials in this organ, which is
affected by myocardial infarctions. Atriums and ventricles make up the four chambers of
this organ in humans. For the point, name this central organ whose namesake “beat” is
essential to human life.

ANSWER: Heart (accept Heartbeat)

(27) This organelle in eukaryotic cells contains cytochrome c oxidase, which participates
in the electron transport chain. The Krebs cycle occurs in the matrix of this organelle.
Cristae are folds in the inner membrane of this organelle, where a proton gradient helps
synthesize ATP, the cell’s main energy currency. For the point, name this so-called
“powerhouse of the cell.”

ANSWER: Mitochondria (or Mitochondrion)

(28) Electroreceptors in the pores of these animals are known as Ampullae of Lorenzini.
Cladoselache was a genus of early predecessors to these animals, which contain multiple
rows of replaceable teeth. The “whale” variety of these animals is the largest extant fish
species. For the point, name these animals that include “hammerhead” and “great white”
varieties.

ANSWER: Sharks (accept Whale Sharks; accept Hammerhead Sharks; accept Great White
Sharks; prompt on "Fish")

(29) Ernest Rutherford was the first to apply the current name to this particle. This
baryon is a fermion with a half-integer spin composed of three valence quarks, two up
quarks and one down quark. While this nucleon is commonly bound to another subatomic
particle, the most common isotope of hydrogen’s nucleus is a lone one of these particles. For
the point, name this positively-charged subatomic particle that composes an atom’s nucleus
with the neutron.

ANSWER: Proton
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 5


(30) The very low Bond albedo of this planet’s rings explain why they are so dark in
color. This planet was originally called the "Georgian Star" by its discoverer, who also was
the first to spy its moons Titania and Oberon. This planet's extreme seasonal variance has
been explained by its almost ninety degree sideways tilt. William Herschel discovered, for
the point, what seventh planet from the Sun that lies between Saturn and Neptune?

ANSWER: Uranus



Extra Questions
(1)     These organisms contain the transcription factor Gal4, which is used in their
namesake "two-hybrid screening" assay to detect protein interactions. The most common
form of thrush is caused by infection with one of these organisms, Candida albicans. Both "a"
and "alpha" mating types are found in the "baker's" type of these organisms. For the point,
name these unicellular fungi used in making bread and beer.

ANSWER: yeasts (accept Saccharomyces; accept Saccharomyces cerevisiae; accept
Candida albicans; prompt on "fungi")

(2)     The SI unit for this quantity was redefined in terms of the Boltzmann constant in
2019. The inputs of Planck’s Law are frequency and this quantity. According to Charles’ law,
this quantity varies directly with volume in a gas. Materials lose superconductivity above
this quantity’s critical value. This quantity is measured on the Rankine scale, which starts at
absolute zero but uses Fahrenheit units. For the point, name this quantity measured by a
thermometer.

ANSWER: temperature (prompt on "degrees")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 2



(MS) Science Bee Round 2
Regulation Tossups
(1)     This disease ravaged European forces active in the Caribbean, and France’s effort to
reconquer Haiti was thwarted in part by this disease. This disease, also known as "Bronze
John", is mentioned on the tombstone of Walter Reed, a U.S. Army physician who confirmed
the theory, proposed by a Cuban physician named Carlos Finlay, that this disease was
transmitted through Aedes aegypti [[eh-DEEZ eh-GIP-tee]]. For the point, name this viral
disease that is transmitted through mosquitos, named for the jaundice it causes.

ANSWER: Yellow Fever (or Yellow Jack; or Yellow Plague; accept Bronze John before
mentioned)

(2)     John Waterston’s 1845 paper expanded on this law by unearthing Daniel Bernoulli’s
earlier application of Newton’s laws of motion to this law at a molecular level. That
application to this law would prompt the future establishment of the kinetic theory of gases.
Though this gas law was published in London by a namesake Anglo-Irish physicist in 1662,
Edme Mariotte independently rediscovered this law. For the point, name this gas law that
examines how the pressure of a gas often decreases as the volume of its container increases.

ANSWER: Boyle’s Law (or Boyle-Mariotte Law; accept Mariotte’s Law before mentioned)

(3)    An early manifestation of this disease is seen in many newborns in what is known as
meconium ileus in which a child suffers from bowel obstruction. Among the methods used to
diagnose this disease is a sweat test that measures the concentration of chloride in an
individual's sweat and a carrier screening that can help detect a mutation of the CFTR gene.
For the point, name this genetic condition in which scar tissue forms on the pancreas and
mucus clogs the lungs.

ANSWER: Cystic Fibrosis (accept CF)

(4)     The value for this quantity in an isolated conducting sphere is equal to 4 pi times
epsilon naught times its radius. This quantity can be increased by the presence of a
dielectric, and unlike resistance, this quantity sums linearly for its circuit components in
parallel. Charge is equal to this quantity times voltage. Self and mutual are two types of, for
the point, what quantity, the ratio of charge stored to electric potential?

ANSWER: Capacitance (accept Capacitor)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 2


(5)     Scientists believe that one organism’s ability to live in these environments is due to
the thermal insulation provided by bacteria living on its back. Those bacteria are among the
various microbes that take up methane and sulfides found on the ground in these
environments, which in turn, supports other organisms such as limpets and giant tube
worms. Chemosynthesis drives, for the point, what mineral-rich environments that include
the “white smoker” types and is found on the seafloor?

ANSWER: Hydrothermal Vents (accept Black Smokers; accept White Smokers before
mentioned; prompt on “Vents”; prompt on “Seafloor”; prompt on "Extreme" or
"Extremophile")

(6)      Early implementations of this computational concept include one researched by C.
Chapin Cutler at Bell Labs in 1950, known as the Differential Pulse-Code Modulation. This
process is often dubbed "lossy" or "lossless" depending on how much information is lost.
For the point, identify this computational process that reduces the size of transmissions or
files, such as .MP3 and .MPEG, by encoding information using fewer bits than the original
representation.

ANSWER: Data Compression (accept Source Coding; accept Bit-Rate Reduction

(7)     One of these objects is the entity behind the Einstein cross, which arises due to
gravitational lensing. The distinction between these entities and blazars is the direction of
emission of a relativistic jet, and these objects are often categorized as radio-loud or radio-
quiet. For the point, name these active galactic nuclei, the most luminous objects in the
universe.

ANSWER: Quasars (accept Quasi-Stellar Object; or QSO; prompt on “Active Galactic
Nucleus” before mentioned)

(8)     An enzyme precursor required for this process is called Christmas factor. Collagen
binding activates proteins such as kallikrein and von Willebrand factor during this process's
namesake "cascade." The drug Warfarin inhibits this process by reducing Vitamin K.
Thrombin triggers the formation of a fibrin network during this process, which is impaired
in hemophiliacs. Platelets aggregate at the site of a wound in, for the point, what process
that stops blood loss?

ANSWER: Blood Clotting (or Coagulation; accept Thrombosis)

(9)     The export of protons leads cells surrounding these structures to uptake potassium
ions. Root-produced abscisic acid causes the closure of these structures, which are inactive
during the day in CAM plants. These structures are surrounded by two guard cells and are
located mainly on the bottom of leaves to take in carbon dioxide. For the point, name these
pores that regulate gas exchange in plants.

ANSWER: Stomata (accept Stomates; accept Guard Cells before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 2


(10) The liquid form of this element is used in experiments such as DarkSide and other
dark matter detection surveys. An isotope of potassium decays to this element in a
radiometric dating technique named for the two elements. This noble gas is the third-most
abundant element in Earth’s atmosphere after nitrogen and oxygen. For the point, identify
this noble gas named for the Greek for "lazy" whose atomic number is 18.

ANSWER: Argon (or Ar; accept K-Ar dating)

(11) Healthy examples of this tissue exclusively have chondrocyte [[KON-dro-site]] cells.
The amount of proteoglycan and collagen in this tissue determines if it is hyaline, fibro, or
elastic. Along with bone tissue, this tissue is destroyed in osteoarthritis. This tissue makes
up the skeletons of skates, rays, and sharks. For the point, name this flexible structural
tissue that lines joints and makes up the nose and ear.

ANSWER: Cartilage (accept Cartilaginous tissue)

(12) The North Sea is an epeiric sea on one of these entities. This entity ends at the point
of an increasing slope called a 'break', before which lie the regions called the slope and rise.
The pelagic environment of these entities comprise the neritic zone, while the benthic zone
is its seafloor region. For the point, name these portions of a continent submerged under an
area of shallow water that can be exposed when sea levels drop.

ANSWER: Continental shelf

(13) Although not indicative of HSV-1 encephalitis, high levels of this substance in
cerebrospinal fluid are indicative of bacterial meningitis. This substance is produced in the
Cori Cycle from pyruvate and then converted back to pyruvate in the liver, leading to
gluconeogenesis. A byproduct of anaerobic metabolism is, for the point, what compound
that is the cause of muscle soreness after a person undergoes intense exercise?

ANSWER: Lactic Acid (or Lactate or CH3CH(OH)COOH)

(14) Electrically-powered types of these objects operate when the object’s magnetic field
and its electric current in a wire generate torque to be applied on the object’s shaft.
Mechanically, these objects typically consist of a stator, commutator, windings, and a rotor
supported by bearings. For the point, name this family of machines designed to convert
forms of energy into mechanical energy.

ANSWER: Motor (or Engine)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 2


(15) The opposite of this word names a type of "deep scattering" that gave evidence for
the existence of quarks. Young's modulus is also named for this property of a material.
According to kinetic molecular theory, gas particles undergo collisions described by this
term where the total kinetic energy remains the same. For the point, what term describes
materials like rubber that return to their original shape after a deformation?

ANSWER: elastic (or elasticity; accept elastic collisions; accept elastic modulus; do not
accept or prompt on "inelastic")

(16) The dot product of two vectors multiplies their magnitudes by this function of the
angle between them. This function names a law that is a generalized form of the
Pythagorean theorem. This trigonometric function is obtained by dividing the adjacent side
of a right triangle by its hypotenuse. The secant function is the reciprocal of, for the point,
what mathematical function, the co-function of sine?

ANSWER: Cosine (accept Law of Cosines)

(17) These entities are classified based on their thermal stratification into either
holomictic or meromictic. These bodies of water become enriched with nutrients during
eutrophication. When a river meander is cut off, the “oxbow” varieties of these bodies of
water can form. For the point, name these bodies of water that come in glacial and fluvial
varieties, examples of which include Michigan and Superior.

ANSWER: Lakes (accept Oxbow Lakes; accept glacial lakes; accept fluvial lakes)

(18) Diatomaceous earth is frequently used in swimming pools as a medium for this
process due to its high porosity. This process is the final step of hot recrystallization, which
is sped up using a vacuum flask and a device named for Ernst Büchner. This physical
process is used to separate sand and water. For the point, name this method of physical
separation that isolates solids from liquids, which can use porous paper and a funnel.

ANSWER: filtration (or filtering)

(19) One of these devices found in San Diego utilized large aluminum-coated
"honeycomb" Pyrex mirrors and is supported by a "horseshoe" mount. These devices, which
can be classified into reflecting and refracting varieties, were used to capture images of the
Double Helix Nebula and the Pillars of Creation. For the point, name these optical devices
used to observe stars, examples of which include the James Webb and Hubble.

ANSWER: Telescopes (accept James Webb Space Telescope; accept Hubble Space
Telescope)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Round 2


(20) This person was presented with one gram of a certain element by Warren Harding
during a tour in the United States. Two countries declared 2011 to be the year of this
person, who analyzed samples of pitchblende and torbernite in experiments that led her to
win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911. Also the winner of the 1903 Nobel Prize in
Physics, this is, for the point, what Polish-French scientist who discovered polonium and
radium, and conducted research on radioactivity with her husband, Pierre?

ANSWER: Marie Curie (or Marie Salomea Skłodowska–Curie; or Maria Salomea
Skłodowska; prompt on "Curie")

(21) The V-2 rocket took the first two images of this celestial body between 1946 and
1947. This celestial body was in the background when Alexei Leonov performed a 12-
minute spacewalk outside Voskhod 2, and this celestial body was the subject of an
impromptu image taken by Voyager 1 which was dubbed by Carl Sagan as the Pale Blue Dot.
During the Gemini 12 mission, Buzz Aldrin took the first “space selfie” with, for the point,
what celestial body that is the third planet from the sun?

ANSWER: Earth

(22) Along with Procyon and Betelgeuse, this star forms one of the angles of the Winter
Triangle. This star is part of a binary system with a white dwarf with a diameter
approximately the same size as Earth, and this star's apparent magnitude is approximately
twice as great as Canopus. For the point, identify this star in Canis Major, the brightest in the
night sky.

ANSWER: Sirius A (or The Dog Star; accept Alpha Canis Majoris; do not accept or prompt
on "Sirius B")

(23) This set of numbers can be constructed from the rationals using Dedekind cuts. This
set of numbers was shown to be uncountable by Cantor’s diagonalization argument. The
rational numbers are dense in this set of numbers, which also includes the irrational
numbers. For the point, what set contains any number that can be expressed on a number
line, contrasted with complex numbers?

ANSWER: Real numbers (prompt on "R")

(24) A compound containing this element is created in the Chapman cycle and can be
measured in Dobson units. This element can be added to an alkene to form an epoxide. This
element is the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain, and the diatomic form
of this element is a product of photosynthesis. For the point, name this element with atomic
number 8 that combines with iron to form rust.

ANSWER: Oxygen (or O; accept Ozone-Oxygen Cycle; accept O2; accept Ozone or O3
before "alkene" is mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 2


(25) Levinthal’s paradox concerns this class of compounds, and the assembly of this
compound is facilitated by chaperonins. Those chaperonins assist the folding of these
compounds into secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures, which are undone by the
process of denaturation. In the ribosome, translation converts messenger RNA into, for the
point, what macromolecules that are made up of amino acid monomers and whose subtypes
include antibodies and enzymes?

ANSWER: Proteins (or Polypeptides, prompt on “Amino Acids” before mentioned)

(26) These structures that can produce tephra were observed by the Voyager 2
spacecraft on Triton. The Pacific Ring of Fire is home to many of these structures that can be
found at convergent and divergent tectonic plate boundaries, examples of which include
Krakatoa and Mauna Loa. Cinder cone, submarine, and shield are all types of, for the point,
what type of structure from which lava erupts?

ANSWER: volcano (accept cinder cone volcano; accept submarine volcano; accept shield
volcano)

(27) A form of this process involves the use of PEP carboxylase to produce oxaloacetic
[[aak-sa-low-AH-suh-tayt]] acid. The most abundant enzyme in the world, RuBisCO, is used
in this process alongside ATP and NADPH to produce the three-carbon molecule G3P during
the Calvin cycle. The chloroplast is the site of, for the point, what process in which plants
use light energy from the sun to convert carbon dioxide and water into glucose?

ANSWER: Photosynthesis (accept C4 Photosynthesis)

(28) Alpha-1 anti-trypsin is an inherited genetic disease that degrades the elasticity of
this organ, which is surrounded by a pleural membrane. A spirometer can be used to
measure the function of this organ, which receives deoxygenated blood via the pulmonary
artery from the heart. Alveoli can be found in, for the point, what primary organ of the
respiratory system that facilities gas exchange and helps us breathe?

ANSWER: lungs (do not accept or prompt on "alveoli")

(29) One phenomena associated with these events is subject to Omori’s law, which
describes how the frequency of those events decreases reciprocal to the amount of time
elapsing from its cause. These events are concentrated at their hypocenter, or focus, and
these events can be followed by aftershocks. For the point, identify this type of seismic
event whose magnitude is measured on the Richter scale.

ANSWER: Earthquakes (accept Tremors; prompt on "Aftershock" before mentioned;
prompt on "Seismic Event" or synonymous answers before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 2


(30) A method named for Euler repeats this operation to find the limit of a series. This
operation is applied to trapezoids in a method for approximating integrals. Doing this
operation on two vectors applies the parallelogram law by aligning them, and, with
multiplication, this is the only commutative arithmetic operation. Zero is the identity of, for
the point, what operation represented by a plus sign?

ANSWER: Addition (or Adding; accept Sum; or Summation; accept Plus before mentioned)



Extra Questions
(1)     The first case of the current outbreak of this disease was reported by the Center for
Disease Control to have been contracted by an inmate in Colorado in 2022. There are three
subtypes of this disease that have been detected in the United States, one of which is a re-
assortment of the Eurasian H5 and the North American N2 viruses. The double crested
cormorant helped spread, for the point, what virus that spreads through contact with
infected animals in the same family as chickens or geese?

ANSWER: Avian Influenza (both underlined portions required) (or Bird Flu; accept H5N1
Virus; accept HPAI)

(2)     The gravitational definition of this quantity states it is the equivalent of an object’s
mass multiplied by its gravitational acceleration, whereas the operational definition states
this quantity is equivalent to the amount of force exerted by an object. The newton is the SI
unit that measures, for the point, what quantity, commonly measured in the U.S. in pounds?

ANSWER: Weight
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Finals



(MS) Science Bee Finals
Regulation Tossups
(1)     When photons from this specific phenomenon enter galactic clusters, they
undergo inverse Compton scattering. The WMAP (+) and COBE probes studied the
anisotropies of this phenomenon, which was discovered at Bell Labs and has a
temperature of about 2.7 Kelvin. Evidence for the Big (*) Bang is given by, for the
points, what black-body radiation that permeates the whole universe and has a frequency
between radio and infrared?

ANSWER: Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation (or CMB; or CMBR; accept Relic
Radiation; prompt on partial answers)

(2)     108 bones were found belonging to this specimen, making him the most
complete skeleton of his species found to date. Blood poisoning caused by severe
tooth decay and a lumbar disc herniation found in a (+) 2013 study are possible
theories concerning the death of this specimen, which was estimated to have
occurred when he was around seven to eleven years old. Discovered by Kamoya
Kimeu and Richard (*) Leakey, this is, for the points, what specimen of the Homo ergaster
species, named after a lake in Kenya?

ANSWER: Turkana Boy (or Nariokotome Boy; or KNM WT-15000)

(3)     The Avery-MacLeod-McCarty experiment identified the substance that was
responsible for this process, which commonly involves the (+) pUC19 plasmid and
recovery S.O.C. medium. Two common ways of performing this technique include the
chemical heat shock and electroporation methods. It's not (*) transfection, but for the
points, name this horizontal gene transfer technique used to introduce foreign DNA into
bacterial or yeast cells.

ANSWER: bacterial transformation (accept genetic transformation; do not accept or
prompt on "transfection" or "mutation")

(4)     Ecosystems that are rated 60 to 100 on the Trophic State Index are defined
with an adjective named after this process, which indicate it having the highest
amount of biological activity. Severe cases of this process may lead to a state of (+)
hypoxia [["high"-PAWK-see-ah]], which coincides with the gradual increase in
elements such as phosphorus and nitrogen in its ecosystems, such as in estuaries or
lakes. An increase in phytoplankton (*) productivity is primarily the cause of, for the
points, what process which occurs when plant nutrients in bodies of water encourage algal
blooms?

ANSWER: Eutrophication (or Hypereutrophication; accept Algal Blooms before
mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Finals


(5)    This protein is transported to the nucleus by importin-9, and this protein is
anchored by vinculin to the cell membrane. This protein comes in globular (+) and
filamentous types, and this protein, under the sliding filament theory, makes up thin
filaments along with tropomyosin and troponin. In cell adhesion, (*) cadherins link to,
for the points, what protein which is the primary component of microfilaments and is
paired with myosin to facilitate muscle contraction?

ANSWER: Actin (accept G-Actin; or F-Actin)

(6)     This substance is found in specialized capillaries called lacteals. Lipid
particles called chylomicrons [[kye-LOH-mee-krons]] transport fats from the
intestines to the body using this substance, which drains into the left subclavian (+)
vein from the thoracic duct. This clear to white substance consists mainly of
interstitial fluid and cells such as T cells (*) and B cells. For the points, name this fluid
found in namesake nodes in the head and neck that swell during infection.

ANSWER: lymph (accept lymphatic fluid; accept chyle)

(7)     This concept is displayed on a tri-axis graph called the de Finetti diagram, in
which a parabola represents its expected frequency. Deviations from this concept
may be influenced by the (+) founder effect and meiotic drive, and the formula
illustrating this concept is "p-squared plus 2 pq plus q-squared equals one." Random
mating and no (*) mutations are assumptions made by, for the points, what doubly-
eponymous principle, which states that allele and genotype frequencies are constant in
every generation as long as no outer influences are present within a population?

ANSWER: Hardy-Weinberg Principle (or Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium)

(8)    The Venice System uses this quantity to classify bodies of water, whose global
average is 35 parts per thousand. This quantity and temperature drive (+)
thermohaline flows, and this quantity increases from the tidal limit of a river to the
mouth of an estuary. In comparision to freshwater, brackish (*) water has a higher
value of, for the points, what quantity that measures the concentration of sodium and
chloride ions in water?

ANSWER: Salinity (accept Salt Concentration; accept descriptive answers like the amount
of salt in water)

(9)     When constructed, the Yakutsk TV Tower was the tallest structure built on
this surface, which can be found in patterns such as palsas and pingos. This material
extended south to New (+) Jersey during the last Ice Age. This surface, whose erosion
in Siberia led scientists to worry about vast carbon dioxide releases into the air, is
common in the (*) tundra. For the points, name this type of ground that remains below the
freezing point for two or more years.

ANSWER: Permafrost (prompt on descriptive answers; prompt on "ice" or "frost")
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Finals


(10) This man ran a museum in Monaco that is blamed for releasing the invasive
species Caulerpa taxifolia [[kuh-LUR-puh TAX-ih-FOH-lee-uh]]. Loël (+) Guinness
leased this man a vessel with a "false nose" that sank in Singapore in 1996, the year
before his death. This man, who often wore a red cap, is featured in the documentary
(*) The Silent World. The Calypso was the research ship used by, for the points, what French
oceanographer who co-invented a breathing device called the Aqua-lung?

ANSWER: Jacques Cousteau [[zhahk koo-STOH]] (or Jacques-Yves Cousteau)

(11) A form of this event that glows red in the dark is called nuée ardente. A
variation of this event occurred on Mount Unzen in Japan, killing Harry Glicken
alongside Katia and Maurice (+) Krafft. That type of variation occurs when this event
is composed of more rock than gas. This natural disaster is often caused by fountain
collapses, which prompted this type of event’s destruction of (*) Herculaneum. For the
points, name this fast-moving current of hot gas and volcanic matter, collectively known as
tephra, that destroyed the ancient city of Pompeii.

ANSWER: Pyroclastic flow (or Pyroclastic density current or Pyroclastic cloud)

(12) These molecules interfere with the Chapman cycle by forming halogen
radicals under UV light, which has caused (+) Antarctic levels of Dobson units to drop
below 220. The Montreal Protocol phased out types of these molecules like Freon,
which is found in (*) aerosols and refrigerants. For the points, name these compounds
which were banned for depleting ozone in the stratosphere, named for the two halogens
they contain.

ANSWER: Chlorofluorocarbons (accept CFCs; or HCFCs; accept Halons; accept Freon
before mentioned; prompt on "Greenhouse Gases")

(13) The discovery that this entity is a supermassive compact object was the
subject of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics. The non-alphanumeric (+) character in
this entity’s name was attached because it was “exciting.” This entity is near the
constellations Scorpius and another constellation it shares a name with, which is
named for an (*) archer. For the points, name this supermassive black hole at the center of
the Milky Way.

ANSWER: Sagittarius A* [["star"]] (prompt on “Sagittarius” or “Sagittarius A”, prompt on
descriptions like “black hole at the center of the Milky Way” by asking “is known by what
name?”)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Finals


(14) According to Andrei Linde, this process in part occurs due to a "slow roll" (+)
parameter. This process, which was proposed by Alan Guth, explains the horizon,
flatness, and magnetic monopole problems. This process took place 10-to-the-
negative-36 seconds after the Big (*) Bang. For the points, name this theory that proposes
a brief period of rapid expansion of the early universe.

ANSWER: Cosmic inflation (accept cosmological inflation)

(15) Eighty-six of these structures were published by Robert Wiedersheim in the
book The Structure of Man: An Index to His Past History, in which he mistakenly
included the pineal gland, since melatonin had not yet been discovered. Douglas (+)
Futuyma [[foo-TOY-muh]] argued that these structures are evidence of evolution, and
some examples of them include the eyes of cave fish and the pelvic bones of snakes
and whales. The wisdom teeth and tailbone (*) of humans are classic examples of, for the
points, what “obsolete” parts of the body that no longer serve a purpose in its present form?

ANSWER: Vestigial Structures (or Vestigial Organs; accept Vestigiality; prompt on
answers synonymous to “non-functioning body parts”)

(16) The approximate distance to this location can be found by adding one to the
object’s orbital eccentricity and multiplying the solution by its (+) semi-major axis.
The date when this location is reached by the Earth is approximately fourteen days
after the June solstice when solar (*) radiation is at its lowest. For the points, name this
point in a satellite’s orbit where the body is furthest from the Sun.

ANSWER: Apogee (accept Aphelion; accept Apsis)

(17) The middle layer of this structure houses Purkinje [[per-KIN-jee]] cells, and
the first model to explicitly state this structure’s anatomy and function was based on
a “teaching (+) signal” sent by a climbing fiber. Impairments to this region of the
central nervous system can cause Huntington’s disease, as well as several forms of
ataxia. Located underneath the (*) occipital and temporal lobes, this is, for the points,
what region of the brain that is responsible for one's motor learning and maintenance of
balance?

ANSWER: Cerebellum (accept Cerebellar Cortex; prompt on "Brain"; prompt on "Little
Brain")

(18) Under special relativity, this law is implied by the general form of the first law
of thermodynamics and Albert Einstein's formula "E equals m c squared." With (+)
the laws of definite and multiple proportions, this law underlies the principles of
stoichiometry [[stoy-kee-YAH-meh-tree]], which is used to balance chemical
reactions. Antoine (*) Lavoisier discovered, for the points, what law that states that matter
can neither be created nor destroyed?

ANSWER: Law of Conservation of Mass (or Law of Conservation of Matter)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Finals


(19) In collaboration with Starling Burgess and Isamu Noguchi, this person
designed and built prototypes of the Dymaxion Car. Biologists have drawn on this
person’s architectural designs to explain the (+) icosahedral shape of many viruses.
This man helped to popularize the concept of “Spaceship Earth” and established a
field he called “synergetics.” A carbon (*) allotrope that comes in ball, tube, and onion
varieties is named for this person. For the points, name this architect remembered for his
geodesic domes.

ANSWER: Buckminster Fuller (or R(ichard) Buckminster "Bucky" Fuller; accept
Buckminster Fullerine)

(20) ITU-R 468 weighting and A-weighting are commonly used to measure a type of
this phenomenon. The thermal excitation of (+) electrons causes a type of this
phenomenon known as its Johnson-Nyquist variety. A type of this phenomenon is
given as the ratio of signal power to its power and adds error to electronic signals. A
constant (*) power spectral density defines the "white" type of, for the points, what
unwanted disturbance of an electrical signal.

ANSWER: Noise (accept Johnson-Nyquist Noise; or Thermal Noise; accept White Noise)

(21) This man listed 800 medical substances and outlined methods of "Special
Pathology" in a book that summarized Galen's work titled (+) The Canon of Medicine.
A book by this man, which introduced the "floating man" theory, incorporates early
psychology and chemistry to cure the ignorance of the soul, titled The Book (*) of
Healing. For the points, name this 11th-century Persian Islamic Golden Age polymath.

ANSWER: Avicenna (accept Ibn Sina)

(22) The lack of this construct differentiates a pseudo-ring from a ring. For
matrices, the multiplicative type of this construct consists of a square (+) matrix with
1’s on the main diagonal and 0’s elsewhere. For addition on the real numbers, this
construct equals 0, and for multiplication, it equals 1 except for the (*) zero case. For
the points, what construct for a binary operation does not change the element it acts on?

ANSWER: Identity (accept Multiplicative Identity; or Additive Identity)

(23) These cells were essential in the research of Harald zur Hausen in linking
human papillomavirus 18 with cervical cancer, for which he won the Nobel Prize in
Physiology and Medicine in 2008. These (+) cells were also essential in the
development of the polio vaccine, as scientists found that the poliovirus was able to
(*) replicate in these cells. For the points, name these “immortal” cells used in medical
research whose name derived from a cancer patient named Henrietta Lacks.

ANSWER: HeLa [[HEE-la]] Cells (accept Henrietta Lack Cells before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                          Finals


(24) During World War Two, this scientist developed vaccines for diseases such as
sleeping sickness and dengue [[DEN-geh]] fever. This man suggested that a (+) certain
virus cultivated in human intestines before attacking the central nervous system,
based on his observation of the bodies of polio victims. Developing a “live” vaccine
that rivaled the “dead" vaccine developed by Jonas (*) Salk, this is, for the points, what
Polish-American scientist who developed the oral polio vaccine, effectively eradicating the
disease?

ANSWER: Albert Sabin (or Albert Bruce Sabin)

(25) This operation’s epsilon-delta definition was first formulated by Cauchy [[koh-
SHEE]]. This operation can be evaluated by L’Hopital’s [[loh-pee-TAHLS] rule. (+) The
formal definition of a derivative is this operation applied to a difference quotient. The
two-sided type of this operation does not exist at jump discontinuities. (*) For the
points, name this operation of finding where a function "approaches" as an input goes
toward a value.

ANSWER: Limit

(26) The term for this computing technique was coined by David Michie in 1968.
Related to caching [["CASH"-ing]], this technique is often used in compilers (+) for
functional programming languages, where a “call by name” strategy is employed.
With the goal of "turning a function into something to be (*) remembered," for the
points, what is this computing technique that stores the results of function calls to be
returned from a cache at a later time, also called tabling?

ANSWER: Memoization [["memo"-"EYE"-zay-shun]] (accept Tabling before mentioned;
prompt on "Memo" or "Memorandum"; prompt on "Caching" before mentioned)

(27) Tin hydride or PTOC thiol are used to calibrate clocks named for these species,
and AIBN is heated to serve to initiate production of these species. A form of
polymerization (+) using these species experiences steps of initiation via homolytic
cleavage, propagation, and termination. Mechanisms containing these species are
drawn using fishhook arrows, and they are thwarted by (*) antioxidants. For the points,
name these chemical species with an unpaired electron.

ANSWER: Free Radicals (prompt on "radical")

(28) This phenomenon was corroborated by the Vines-Matthew-Morley hypothesis,
where a series of magnetic stripes were observed. Convection (+) currents in the
asthenosphere cause this phenomenon, which was first proposed by Harry Hess.
Basaltic crust is created at (*) mid-ocean ridges as a result of this process. For the points,
name this process where new oceanic crust is formed as a result of older crust moving
apart.

ANSWER: Seafloor spreading
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                    Finals


(29) A theorem named for this man states that the order of any element of a group
divides the order of that group. This man names (+) "multipliers" which are used to
find local maxima and minima of a function under equality constraints. This
mathematician names "points" in which the centrifugal force balances (*) gravity. For
the points, name this Italian-French mathematician known for his contributions to number
theory.

ANSWER: Joseph-Louis Lagrange (accept Lagrange Multipliers; accept Lagrange Points)

(30) In 2020, scientists witnessed a star undergoing this phenomenon, in what
some astronomers call a tidal disruption event. The difference in acceleration
between the head and feet of a human (+) causes this effect, although it is theorized
that humans may not experience this phenomenon in supermassive black holes since
its tidal force is less than what is experienced on (*) Earth. For the points, name this
phenomenon that is caused by vertical stretching and horizontal compression, also called
the noodle effect?

ANSWER: Spaghettification (accept Noodle Effect before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                    Finals


Extra Questions
(1)     The process of forming one of these substances is described by the COSMO
model and the Born equation. The K-sp (+) value quantifies an equilibrium observed
in these substances. Molality is often used to measure the concentration of these
substances, which can form a solid precipitate if they are (*) supersaturated. For the
points, name these homogeneous mixtures that consist of a solute dissolved in a solvent.

ANSWER: solution (accept solvation; prompt on "mixtures")

(2)    Certain organisms use organs called halteres to assist in this phenomenon. A
behavior called WAIR, or inclined running, may explain the evolution of this
phenomenon. (+) Archaeopteryx was likely capable of this phenomenon, as was
Quetzalcoatlus. This phenomenon is divided into unpowered and powered forms, and
the only (*) mammal to use this mode of locomotion are bats. For the points, name this
behavior found in pterosaurs and birds.

ANSWER: Flight (or Flying; prompt on "throw[ing] yourself at the ground and miss[ing]")

(3)    Gerard de Lairesse was a congenital sufferer of this disease, symptoms of
which include Hutchinson's teeth and saddle nose. John Charles Cutler orchestrated
an unethical study of this disease on human test subjects in Guatemala, (+) and he
directed another study of this disease that led to the creation of the Office for Human
Research Protections. Caused by Treponema pallidum and possibly the only major
disease brought from the (*) Americas to Europe is, for the points, what sexually-
transmitted disease which the Tuskegee Study victims were left untreated for?

ANSWER: Syphilis
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                             Quarterfinals



(MS) Science Bee Quarterfinals
Regulation Tossups
(1)      In the G protein-coupled signal transduction pathway, this molecule is used by
adenylyl cyclase to synthesize secondary messenger (+) cAMP. Large amounts of this
molecule are synthesized during oxidative phosphorylation via a namesake synthase
enzyme located in the (*) mitochondria. For the points, name this "energy currency" of the
cell, a molecule consisting of adenine, ribose sugar, and three phosphate groups.

ANSWER: ATP (or Adenosine Triphosphate)

(2)      Recovery is one of the two options after this effect occurs, which was exhibited
by the American bison after its population size grew from an estimated 750 in 1890
to about 360,000 by the year 2000. The (+) Toba catastrophe theory suggests that
humans faced this effect 75,000 years ago after the eruption of a supervolcano in
Indonesia. Environmental disasters, habitat destruction, and (*) overhunting can result
in, for the points, what form of genetic drift, which occurs when a drastic reduction of a
population size changes its gene pool?

ANSWER: Bottleneck Effect (or Population Bottleneck; or Genetic Bottleneck; prompt on
“Genetic Drift” before mentioned)

(3)    A supernova remnant in this constellation, formally known as 3C 10, is also
referred to as “Tycho Supernova Remnant” since the astronomer discovered the
object in 1572. The five brightest (+) stars of this constellation — Segin, Ruchbah,
Gamma Cas, Schedar, and Caph — make up its most prominent feature, which
resembles a queen sitting on her (*) throne. For the points, name this constellation that
can be recognized by the naked eye in the shapes of an “M” or “W”, named after a
mythological queen of Ethiopia.

ANSWER: Cassiopeia (or Cassiopeiae)

(4)     This structure is sometimes referred to as Palade granules, which are
composed of RNA and ribonucleoprotein. Tetracycline blocks the aminoacyl-tRNA
and (+) peptidyl-tRNA during a process that takes place in this structure. This
structure is comprised of two subunits denoted as 30S in prokaryotes and 40S in
eukaryotes. Translation (*) occurs in, for the points, what protein-synthesizing organelle
that resides in the nucleus and nucleolus and gives a form of endoplasmic reticulum its
"rough" appearance?

ANSWER: Ribosomes (accept Palade granules before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                Quarterfinals


(5)     Proteins are "displayed" on the surface of the M13 class of these agents in a
common method for directed evolution. The T2 (+) type of these agents was labelled
with radioactive sulfur and phosphorus in the Hershey-Chase experiment that proved
DNA is genetic material. When reproducing, these agents can switch from the
lysogenic to the lytic cycle, which destroys their (*) host cell. For the points, name these
viruses that infect bacteria.

ANSWER: bacteriophages (or phages; accept phage display; prompt on "virus")

(6)     According to Emery’s rule, the social form of this behavior is seen between
two closely related organisms, which is exhibited when the larvae of large blue
butterflies employ ant mimicry. Great (+) frigate birds stealing the prey of another
seabird and cuckoo bees laying in the nests of other bees exhibit the klepto- form of
this behavior. The presence of tapeworms (*) inside a human’s intestines is a prime
example of, for the points, what type of symbiotic relationship in which one organism
benefits at the expense of another?

ANSWER: Parasitism (accept other word forms; accept Social Parasitism; accept
Kleptoparasitism; accept Brood Parasitism; accept Adelphoparasitism; prompt on
“Symbiosis” before mentioned)

(7)    Ninety percent of the bacteria that live in this location come from the phyla
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. Microorganisms that live in this habitat form a
biochemical signaling axis with the (+) brain. Barry Marshall found that ulcers can be
caused by H. pylori bacteria living in this habitat, whose collective organismal
community is called the flora or microbiota. The colon (*) contains the highest
concentration of bacteria living in, for the points, what body system?

ANSWER: digestive system (accept digestive tract; accept gut; accept gastrointestinal
tract; accept GI tract; accept stomach; accept small intestines; accept large intestines;
accept intestines; accept colon before mention; prompt on "body" or "human body")

(8)     These structures were found to have eighty shapes according to a
classification system devised by Ching Woo Lee and Choji Magono. Another
classification of these structures is outlined in the (+) Nakaya diagram, which
suggests that its various formations are dependent on supersaturation and
temperature. Formed through the Wegener-Bergeron-Findeisen (*) process, these are,
for the points, what single ice crystals that come in columns, dendrites, and needles
varieties, in which a common adage says that “no two are alike”?

ANSWER: Snowflakes (accept Ice Crystals or Snow Crystals before “crystals” is
mentioned; prompt on “Crystals” before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                               Quarterfinals


(9)     These events occur when the sun and moon are separated by ninety degrees
as viewed from Earth. These events are predicted by measuring the rise of (+) sea
levels, and a small range of heights indicates these events whereas a large range
indicates the spring type. Sometimes referred to as a quadrature (*) tide, for the
points, what is this tide that occurs when there's a difference between high and low water?

ANSWER: Neap Tide (or Quadrature Tide before mentioned; prompt on "Tide")

(10) One of these places called Sudbury Basin was formed after the Nuna
supercontinent was hit by a bolide. These places, the largest of which is the (+)
Vredefort in South Africa, include one underneath Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula called
Chicxulub [[chik-ZHOO-loob]]. These places typically have raised rims and floors
lower in elevation than the surrounding (*) terrain. For the points, name these places
created when meteorites hit the Earth's surface.

ANSWER: Impact craters (accept Astroblemes)

(11) This person ended his Nobel Prize lecture by stating "Beauty is the splendor of
truth." An observatory named for this scientist includes the ACIS, or Advanced CCD
Imaging (+) Spectrometer, and is NASA's flagship X-ray telescope. A value named for
this man is about 1.4 solar masses and is the maximum mass that a stable white (*)
dwarf can have. For the points, name this Indian-American astrophysicist who spent most of
his professional career as a professor at the University of Chicago.

ANSWER: Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar (accept Chandrasekhar limit; prompt on
“Chandra” or “Chandra X-ray Observatory”)

(12) This mountain is home to the Pangboche Crater near its summit and formed
during the Noachian Period. This mountain is associated with the Tharsis (+) Montes
chain, and has a surface area larger than Hungary. Of known peaks, this mountain is
only possibly surpassed by Rheasilvia on Vesta, standing at a height of (*) 72,000 feet.
For the points, name this volcano, the highest of Mars and the Solar System.

ANSWER: Olympus Mons (accept Nix Olympica)

(13) A body part that allows some animals to perform this ability is the called the
melon, which is an area of the head made of adipose tissue. Although this ability is
primarily produced through the mouth, the (+) horseshoe variety of one species
perform this ability through their nostrils. Porpoises can evade orcas due to this
ability, which is produced at around 130 kilohertz. Produced at the same (*)
frequencies as an ultrasound, this is, for the points, what sensory ability used by bats and
whales to help them navigate by sound?

ANSWER: Echolocation (prompt on “Sound Waves”; prompt on “Sonar”)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                  Quarterfinals


(14) A population's standard deviation is divided by the square root of this
quantity to give the standard error of the mean. The distribution of sample means
approaches a (+) normal distribution as this quantity increases according to the
central limit theorem. The mean of a set equals the sum of the values (*) divided by
this quantity. For the points, name this quantity symbolized n, which is the number of data
points in a set.

ANSWER: sample size (or population size; accept n before mention; prompt on answers
such as "how many there are" or "the number of values there are")

(15) A precursor to this technique produces a Taylor cone from a sample that is
dispersed by electrospray. The "tandem" form of this technique is used to sequence
proteins. Gas (+) chromatography is often paired with this technique, which produces
sizable M and M+2 isotope peaks when the sample contains bromine or chlorine. The
m-to-z (*) ratio is measured by, for the points, what spectroscopic technique that separates
ions by their weight?

ANSWER: mass spectrometry (or mass spectroscopy; or MS; accept tandem mass
spectrometry; accept GC-MS)

(16) This element was the metal constituent in a chemical which was involved in a
1990 explosion at a Russian military plant in Utika. Another (+) compound
containing this metal has the lowest dispersive power for a solid. Isotopes of this
element break into two alpha particles. The alkaline earth (*) metal with the lowest
mass, for the points, what element has atomic number 4 and symbol Be?

ANSWER: Beryllium (accept Be before mentioned; accept Beryllium oxide or Beryllium
fluoride)

(17) This man names a rule for differentiating under the integral sign. The
alternating series test in series (+) convergence is alternately named for this
mathematician. This man, whose philosophical works include Discourse on
Metaphysics, also published a text which presented a formulation of a subject that
another mathematician explained with (*) fluxions. For the points, name this
mathematician who invented calculus independently of Isaac Newton.

ANSWER: Gottfried Leibniz (or Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz

(18) In H Two regions, Bok globules are extremely cold locations where this
process may occur. This process, which occurs at high rates in starburst galaxies,
leads to the formation of a protoplanetary (+) disk. The photograph The Pillars of
Creation shows this process, which starts after the collapse of a giant (*) molecular
cloud. For the points, name this process that occurs in stellar nurseries, forming objects like
the Sun.

ANSWER: Star formation (accept reasonable equivalents like stars being created)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                               Quarterfinals


(19) After this scientist became the first to isolate benzene, he became the first
Fullerian Professor of Chemistry at the Royal (+) Institution. With his ice pail
experiment, this chemist and physicist developed an enclosure wherein
electromagnetic fields (*) are blocked. For the points, name this inventor of the
homopolar generator who developed a namesake law on electromagnetic induction.

ANSWER: Michael Faraday (accept Faraday's Law of Induction; accept Faraday's Cage)

(20) In Tierra del Fuego, these structures have resulted in major losses in fauna
life. These structures are often designed to protect shelters called (+) lodges using
moats. These structures, which often result in excess nutrient removal, are anchored
by branches pointing (*) upstream, making the animals that make them keystone species.
For the points, name these structures created on streams by large rodents.

ANSWER: Beaver dams (accept Beaver ponds; prompt on "Dams")

(21) The trailing suction method of this task involves filling hoppers with material
and unloading it once full, while another method involves use of a suction device and
a specialized augur. Leonardo (+) Da Vinci developed a schematic for a "drag" tool to
perform this task, which was done in ancient times to construct harbors along the
Eastern Mediterranean. Sometimes used to recycle sand for "beach (*) nourishment,"
for the points, what is the term for excavating material from beneath the water?

ANSWER: dredging (or dredge; prompt on "excavation"; prompt on descriptions like
"digging underneath water" before mentioned)

(22) To use this method on larger problems, it is often useful to implement a "tail
call" to optimize memory use and avoid stack (+) overflows. Common
implementations of this concept in programming are calculating factorials, greatest
common divisor, binary search, and the Towers of (*) Hanoi problem. For the points,
what is this non-iterative method of solving computational problems, where functions call
themselves from within their own code.

ANSWER: Recursion (accept Recursive algorithm/program; accept Tail Recursion)

(23) This phenomenon can be applied to current meters to measure water current
velocities. In medicine, this effect can help assess the direction of blood flow and the
velocity of blood and cardiac tissue in an (+) echo-cardiogram, and when applied to
astronomy, the relativistic form of this effect can utilize electromagnetic waves to
detect the rotational speed of stars and (*) galaxies. For the points, name this effect, the
change in the frequency of waves in relation to an observer.

ANSWER: Doppler Effect (or Doppler Shift)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                Quarterfinals


(24) Gauss’s law can be proven from this equation if the superposition principle is
fulfilled. A constant in this inverse-square law is equal to one over four pi times the
permittivity of (+) free space. That constant used in this law is approximately equal to
8.988 x 10^9. The electrostatic interaction between two point (*) charges can be
described by, for the points, what law that relates force to the product of k, q1, and q2 all
over r-squared, named after a French physicist?

ANSWER: Coulomb's Law (or Coulomb's Inverse-Square Law)

(25) One of the first references to this term for a type of computer program was in
the first UNIX manual in 1971. This term was popularized by Ken (+) Thompson in his
1983 Turing Award lecture “Reflections on Trusting Trust”. These entities
differentiate themselves from a virus by not injecting themselves into other (*) files.
For the points, name this type of malware that misleads users of its purpose, whose name
derives from an Ancient Greek story of deception.

ANSWER: Trojan (accept Trojan Horse)

(26) A model generalizing this phenomenon was solved in two dimensions by Lars
Onsager as a lattice of interacting plus-one and minus-one spins; that model is the (+)
Ising model. This property persists even after a change in the applied field due to its
hysteresis. Materials lose this property if heated past the Curie (*) temperature. For
the points, name this form of magnetism exhibited by nickel, cobalt, and its namesake, iron.

ANSWER: ferromagnetism (prompt on "magnet(ism)"; do not accept or prompt on
"paramagnetism")

(27) This man pioneered the method of infinite descent in proofs and frequently
applied that method to Diophantine [[dee-oh-FAHN-teen]] (+) equations. This
mathematician proved that a prime number must be 1 mod 4 to be the sum of two
perfect squares, and his “Little Theorem” is one of the pillars of (*) number theory. For
the points, name this French mathematician whose “Last Theorem” was proved by Andrew
Wiles in 1995.

ANSWER: Pierre de Fermat [[fehr-MAH]]

(28) This structure consists of various gyri [[JYE-RYE]], including the non-
functional gyrus rectus located in this structure’s lateral portion. The functions of
this structure are measured by Wisconsin (+) Card Sorting and Token Tests, which
examine response inhibition and language, respectively. Injury to this lobe may lead
to personality changes, as seen in Phineas (*) Gage after an iron rod severed this area of
the brain. For the points, name this the largest lobe of the brain associated with problem-
solving?

ANSWER: Frontal Lobe (prompt on "Cerebrum", "Prefrontal Cortex", "Frontal Cortex", or
"Cerebral Cortex"; prompt on “Brain” before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                               Quarterfinals


(29) These mixtures, one of the three primary types, have particles ranging
between one and one thousand nanometers in diameter. Crystals (+) formed
according to the principles of these type of mixtures are capable of self-assembly, and
categories of these types of mixtures include emulsions and (*) foams. For the points,
name this type of discrete or continuous mixture that can be created by mixing, for example,
Jell-O powder and water.

ANSWER: Colloids (accept Hydrocolloids)

(30) Because this substance stores as much as ten times more carbon dioxide than
other ecosystems, scientists consider it the most efficient natural carbon sink on
earth. The (+) Tollund Man was preserved in an ecosystem containing this substance,
which makes up fens. Sphagnum moss makes up most of this substance, which is
made of decayed (*) plant matter. For the points, name this substance that can accumulate
in bogs.

ANSWER: Peat (accept Peat moss; accept Turf)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                            Quarterfinals


Extra Questions
(1)     This compound is industrially produced in the anthra-quinone [[an-thrah-
KWY-nohn]] process. A solution of ferrous iron and this compound is used to treat
drinking water as (+) Fenton's reagent. Within eukaryotic [[yoo-"care"-ee-AH-tik]]
cells, specialized vacuoles use catalase [[KAT-ah-"lace"]] to break down this
compound into water and (*) oxygen. For the points, name this compound with formula
H2O2 which, like isopropyl alcohol, is commonly used as a first aid antiseptic.

ANSWER: Hydrogen Peroxide (accept H2O2 before mentioned; prompt on "peroxide")

(2)     One form of this law is joined with Faraday's law to give an induction equation
for ideal MHD. Another form of this law states that current density equals sigma
times electric (+) field. At low forward bias, this law does not apply to diodes, and the
drops calculated by this law add to zero, according to (*) Kirchhoff's loop rule. For the
points, name this law that states voltage equals current times resistance.

ANSWER: Ohm's Law

(3)    Methods that measure this quantity include the concentric cylinder geometry,
which consists of a spindle, inner bob, and an outer cup and a similar apparatus that
consists of a spindle, (+) cone, and plate. Air has the lowest value of the absolute type
of this quantity while glass has the highest value. Glycerol has the value of (*) 1
Newton-second per square meter in, for the points, what quantity that comes in the
dynamic and kinematic types and describes a fluid’s resistance to flow?

ANSWER: Viscosity (accept Absolute Viscosity; accept Dynamic Viscosity; accept
Kinematic Viscosity)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 1



(MS) Science Bee Round 1
Regulation Tossups
(1)     A bullet's speed can be measured using the "ballistic" type of this device. The motion
of these devices is described using the small angle approximation of "sine theta equals
theta". A system with two of these devices attached end-to-end exhibits chaotic behavior.
Foucault [[foo-KOH]] demonstrated the rotation of the Earth using one of these devices,
which is also a simple harmonic oscillator. For the point, name these devices that consist of
a mass hanging on a string.

ANSWER: pendulums (accept Foucault's pendulum; accept double pendulum; accept
ballistic pendulum; prompt on "simple harmonic oscillator" or "SHO")

(2)     The thermodynamic square is used to remember this man’s set of second-order
partial differential relations between potentials. He’s not Laplace [[lah-PLAHSS]], but this
man posited a namesake “demon” that would violate the second law of thermodynamics.
This scientist added a displacement current term to expand Ampere’s law. For the point,
name this Scottish physicist whose namesake four “equations” are the foundations of
electromagnetism.

ANSWER: James Clerk Maxwell (accept Maxwell's Demon; accept Maxwell's Equations)

(3)    This disorder is associated with rare hereditary diseases like Hermansky-Pudlak
syndrome and Chediak-Higashi syndrome. This genetic disorder may be caused by
mutations in the P gene or the TYR gene, the latter of which contains tyrosinase, an enzyme
involved in the production of melanin. Oculocutaneous [[ah-kyoo-loh-KYOO-teh-nee-us]]
and ocular are common forms of, for the point, what genetic condition where the body
produces little to no melanin, causing a lack of pigment in a person’s skin, hair, and eyes?

ANSWER: Albinism (accept Albino; accept Achromasia; accept Oculocutaneous Albinism
before mentioned; accept Ocular Albinism before mentioned)

(4)     The Aleutian [[ah-LOO-shen]] arc was formed by subduction along these types of
locations, which were explored by vehicles such as Kaiko and Trieste. The deepest one of
these locations is named after a nearby Pacific Island Chain, with its deepest point being
Challenger Deep. For the point, name these depressions in the ground caused by tectonic
plate movement, some of which include the Marianas.

ANSWER: Oceanic Trenches (accept Marianas Trench)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 1


(5)     A variety of this mineral, along with iridium, is found at the K-Pg boundary and
provides evidence for the hypothesis that an asteroid impact killed the dinosaurs. This
mineral is found at the bottom of Bowen’s reaction series. The “shocked” variety of this
mineral was found at the Chicxulub crater, and its chemical name is silicon dioxide. For the
point, name this mineral that is a seven on the Mohs hardness scale.

ANSWER: Quartz (accept Shocked Quartz)

(6)     Peak resolution and band broadening are the main concerns of this technique's
general elution problem. Proteins and polymers are purified using the size-exclusion type of
this technique. The retention factor in this technique measures the relative amount of time a
solute spends in the mobile and stationary phases. Thin-layer and column are variants of,
for the point, what technique used to separate mixtures, such as the pigments in pen ink?

ANSWER: Chromatography (accept specific types, including Size-exclusion
Chromatography; or Thin-layer Chromatography; or Column Chromatography)

(7)     Unlike a similar tissue, this particular tissue in plants follows Murray’s law, and the
cohesion-tension theory is explained via hydrostatic pressure in this tissue. The "meta"
variety of this tissue is distinguished from the “proto” variety by the presence of wider
tracheids [[TRAY-kyids]]. Water and nutrients are transported upward through this tissue
from the roots to the stem and leaves. For the point, name this plant tissue contrasted with
the phloem.

ANSWER: Xylem (accept Metaxylem; or Protoxylem; or Primary Xylem; or Secondary
Xylem)

(8)     Features of this constellation include the Becklin-Neugebaeuer [[NOY-geh-bow-
ehr]] Object and the Barnard’s Loop, which is an emission nebula located in the
constellation’s molecular cloud complex. The horsehead nebula is in this constellation’s
most defining feature, and the brightest stars in this constellation include Rigel and
Betelgeuse. The stars Alnitak, Alnitam, and Mintaka make up the “belt” of, for the point,
what constellation that is named for a hunter in Greek mythology?

ANSWER: Orion

(9)    This organelle is the site for the majority of the activity of cathepsins, and this
organelle facilitates autophagy upon combination with a phagosome. Proteins tagged with
mannose-6-phosphate are destined for transport to this organelle, and a pH of around 4 to
5, which is acidic, is necessary for the function of this organelle. Storage diseases, such as
the Tay-Sachs disease, primarily affect, for the point, what organelle in animal cells that is
responsible for breaking down macromolecules?

ANSWER: Lysosome
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 1


(10) Locations such as Haua Fteah and Atapuerca contained stone tools from this species'
Mousterian culture. A 2013 study found that the discovery of a hyoid bone from the Kebara
Cave did not provide evidence for this species' ability to speak. This species, which
interbred with the closely related Denisovan group, became extinct roughly 30,000 years
ago. For the point, name these hominids with heavy brows, named for the German valley
where their remains were discovered.

ANSWER: Neanderthals (accept Homo sapiens neanderthalensis)

(11) In a controversy surrounding this concept, a hash code was sent between the
opponents, which, when deciphered, contained the mention of fluxions. The publishing of
the work Nova Methodus pro Maximis et Minimis furthered one man’s claim to invent this
subject often described as the “study of infinitesimals." For the point, name this subject that
was invented independently by Gottfried Leibnitz and Isaac Newton.

ANSWER: Calculus (prompt on "fluxions" before mentioned)

(12) Many ammonoids and conodonts went extinct during this period's Carnian pluvial
episode. During this period, Pangaea began to separate into the continents of Laurasia and
Gondwana. This period, which followed the mass extinction of trilobites in the "Great
Dying," gave rise to the archosaurs. The Permian era preceded, for the point, what first
geologic period in the Mesozoic Era, named for a set of three distinct rock layers?

ANSWER: Triassic Period

(13) The outer portion of this region is determined by the Kármán line. This region is
comprised of several layers, including one which absorbs much of the ultraviolet radiation
from the Sun. Nitrogen, oxygen, argon, and carbon dioxide are the four predominant gases
that make up, for the point, what collective term for the layers of gases surrounding a
planet?

ANSWER: (Earth's) Atmosphere (prompt on "thermosphere" or "exosphere" before
"several layers"; prompt on "air")

(14) It’s not luminosity, but this quantity is commonly calculated using the Faber-Jackson
relation. Type 1a supernovae lie near the top of a namesake “ladder” that contains methods
for determining this quantity. Standard candles are used to compute this quantity. Large
values for this quantity are often expressed in parsecs. For the point, name this quantity,
which for the Sun equals one astronomical unit.

ANSWER: Distance (from Earth)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 1


(15) Aprotic examples of these substances include tetrahydrofuran and DMSO. Partition
coefficients describe compounds where two of these substances are present, and their
polarity is given by their dielectric constants. The main ingredient in nail polish, acetone, is
often used in organic chemistry as one of these substances. Immiscible examples of these
substances do not mix with each other. For the point, name these substances that dissolve
solutes to form solutions.

ANSWER: Solvents

(16) Napoleonic-era surgeon Dominique Jean Larrey mandated that ships use this
substance to sterilize when they did not have access to alcohol. The first known ingredients
list for this substance can be found in the Wujing Zongyao [[WOO-JING ZONG-YOW]] of the
Song Dynasty, and this substance was used to light fireworks prior to its military
application. For the point, name this substance used to propel bullets in early firearms.

ANSWER: Gunpowder (accept Black Powder)

(17) Some of these objects are engineered at the Renton and Everett factories, where
parts like the fuselage and stabilizer are fused together with bolts. Bernoulli's principle
explains how lift is generated when air passes over a certain part of these objects. It's not a
helicopter, but for the point, name these class of vehicles that can fly, examples of which
include the Airbus A380 and Boeing 787.

ANSWER: airplanes (or aeroplane; accept jet; or jetplane)

(18) The only stand-alone group of Hilbert axioms concerns an axiom about this
property, which is equivalent to Playfair's axiom. Two vectors that have a cross product of
zero have this property. Euclid's fifth postulate is named for this property and implies that
all angles of a rectangle are right angles. Two lines with this property have the same slope.
For the point, name this property of two lines in the same plane that will never intersect.

ANSWER: Parallel (accept Parallel Postulate)

(19) Kupffer cells break down red blood cells in this organ, and most of the blood supply
of this organ is delivered by the portal vein. This organ is the primary site of the urea cycle
and gluconeogenesis. Late-stage scarring of this organ is termed cirrhosis, while its
inflammation is known as hepatitis. For the point, name this digestive organ that detoxifies
blood and produces bile.

ANSWER: Liver
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Round 1


(20) If the polar angle is this quantity, the resulting point will be on the negative side of
the x-axis. The Madhava-Leibniz series approaches this number, and it’s not e, but this was
the first number proven to be transcendental. This number times four-thirds times the
radius cubed gives the volume of a sphere. For the point, give this term for the ratio
between a circle’s circumference and its diameter, approximately 3.14.

ANSWER: Pi (accept Archimedes' Constant; accept 3.14 before mentioned)

(21) This particle's interaction with other elementary particles can be observed through
Raman scattering. In the Standard Model, this hadron is categorized as having electroweak
interactions, and this particle is unified with the W and Z gauge bosons. For the point, name
these massless elementary particles symbolized by the Greek letter gamma, the quanta of
the electromagnetic field, and more specifically light.

ANSWER: Photons

(22) The malloc function in C and C++ allocates this resource, and Java uses automatic
garbage collection to reclaim this resource, which is stored near the main processor in a
CPU cache. The non-volatile type of this resource retains data even without a power source.
For the point, name this computer resource used to store information that comes in a
random access type abbreviated RAM.

ANSWER: Memory (accept Random Access Memory; accept RAM; accept Virtual Memory;
accept Storage; prompt on "data")

(23) The cross product of this quantity and the magnetic field appears in the formula for
the Lorentz force. This quantity's phase type is described as the rate at which a wave
propagates in a medium. The time derivative of this quantity is acceleration, and the unit of
this quantity is usually expressed in meters per second. Displacement divided by time
equals, for the point, what vector quantity that consists of both speed and direction,
denoted as "v"?

ANSWER: Velocity (accept Phase Velocity; accept v before mentioned; prompt on “Speed”)

(24) A mutation in one species of these animals, the Stickleback, has allowed them to
adapt between different habitats. The majority of these animals belong to the class
Actinopterygii [[ack-tee-nop-TEH-rih-gee]]. Respiration in these animals occurs through a
closed-loop circulatory system and gills. For the point, name these aquatic animals,
examples of which include lampreys, sharks, and piranhas.

ANSWER: Fish (accept Stickleback Fish; accept Catfish; prompt on "Shark" before
mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 1


(25) This plant commonly grows alongside, and is often mistaken for, the Virginia
creeper. This plant contains a resin called urushiol that induces a form of contact dermatitis,
and "black-spot" deposits caused by this plant can be treated with topical corticosteroids.
The phrase "Leaves of three, let it be" applies to, for the point, what plant of the genus
Toxicodendron that is closely related to other species named "oak" and "sumac", whose sap
causes an itchy rash?

ANSWER: Poison Ivy (accept Poison Oak; accept Poison Sumac; accept Toxicodendron
radicans)

(26) A hyperfine transition in this element leads to a form of radiation called the 21-
centimeter line. This element's alpha emission line is dark red as part of its Balmer series.
This element makes up 75 percent of the baryonic mass of the universe. This element is
fused by main sequence stars to produce helium. For the point, name this lightest and most
abundant element in the universe.

ANSWER: Hydrogen

(27) These objects are harvested to make beer by the Quidi Vidi Brewing Company in
Newfoundland. The largest current one of these objects was first detected in the Weddell
Sea and the largest one on record, B-15, broke off from the Ross Ice Shelf in March, 2000.
Mostly found near Greenland and Antarctica is, for the point, what type of floating, frozen
object that sunk the RMS Titanic?

ANSWER: Iceberg (accept Iceberg B-15)

(28) These types of organisms are classified by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which is
also responsible for their protection. The IUCN’s Red List lists the status of these creatures,
and they're broken down into categories with abbreviations such as VU or CR. The gray wolf
and the humpback whale are examples of, for the point, what type of animals that are
classified as vulnerable, threatened, and near-extinct?

ANSWER: Endangered Species (accept clear knowledge equivalents; accept statuses such
as Vulnerable or Threatened before mentioned)

(29) Structures on this entity include the smooth Borealis basin. The largest mountain in
the solar system, Olympus Mons, is on this planet. A recent expedition to this planet to
search for signs of life in 2021 discovered the presence of hidden water in a canyon. The
Opportunity and Curiosity rovers landed on, for the point, what planet named for the
Roman god of war, the fourth planet from the sun?

ANSWER: Mars
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 1


(30) Sulfonylureas [[suhl-fah-neel-LUH-ree-us]] are a class of organic compounds used to
treat this disease, which is caused by the loss of beta cells in some patients. One form of this
disease involves the inability of cells to respond to insulin, and is often caused by a lack of
physical activity or poor diet. For the point, name this disease characterized by high blood
sugar levels that can be classified into Type 1 and Type 2 varieties.

ANSWER: Diabetes Mellitus (accept Type 1 Diabetes; accept Type 2 Diabetes)



Extra Questions
(1)     This organ is made up of three layers, with its spaces being filled with vitreous and
aqueous humor. Diseases that affect this organ include conjunctivitis and cataracts, and it
contains specialized photoreceptor cells called rods and cones. The lens, cornea, and iris are
structures that are part of, for the point, what organ of the visual system that is responsible
for helping us see?

ANSWER: eyes (accept eyeballs)

(2)    Johann Wolfgang von Goethe [[GUR-tuh]] published a comprehensive book
describing this property, wherein he stated this property is formed from the interplay of
darkness and light. Thomas Young proposed a trichromatic theory postulating that this
property can be replicated by a combination of three lights. For the point, name this visual
property derived from the spectrum of light’s interaction with the eye.

ANSWER: Color
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 3



(MS) Science Bee Round 3
Regulation Tossups
(1)     According to the Milwaukee Protocol, treatments of this disease involve placing an
infected person into an induced coma through the use of anesthesia made of midazolam and
ketamine. The virus causing this disease, uncommonly referred to as "hydrophobia",
emerges from protein aggregates in the brain called Negri bodies. Foaming at the mouth is
notable symptom of, for the point, what viral disease, caused by the genus Lyssavirus, that is
spread through animal bites?

ANSWER: Rabies (accept Rabies Encephalitis; accept Hydrophobia before mentioned;
accept Lyssa before "Lyssavirus" is mentioned)

(2)     These particles, first proposed by George Zweig and Murray Gell-Mann, are believed
to be among the essential building blocks of matter and are considered a fundamental
secondary group of elementary particles. These particles come in six forms, and they
partner with other elementary particles to form protons and neutrons. For the point, name
these charged particles with flavors such as top, charm, and strange.

ANSWER: Quarks (accept Quark Model; accept Up Quarks; accept Down Quarks; accept
Charm Quarks; or Strange Quarks; accept Top Quarks; accept Bottom Quarks)

(3)     The Bajau people of Southeast Asia have enlarged forms of this organ as an
adaptation for diving. Parts of this organ branch into arteries surrounded by PALS tissue.
Damage to this organ can result in overwhelming sepsis from encapsulated organisms.
Sickle cell anemia can sequester this organ that contains white and red pulp. For the point,
name this abdominal organ that destroys old red blood cells.

ANSWER: Spleen

(4)     C compilers turn source code into code named after these entities. All classes in Java
are a subclass of a class named for these entities. Creating these entities typically involves
calling a constructor or using the keyword “new,” and a central programming paradigm
involves these entities, which are instances of classes. For the point, name these things,
whose importance in programming leads languages like Java to be termed “[these things]-
oriented.”

ANSWER: Objects (accept Object code; accept Object-oriented programming)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                         Round 3


(5)      These bodies can be found in the inner cell mass, and they divide in gastrulation to
form germ layers. The depletion of the functional mesenchymal [[meh-zen-KYE-muhl]] type
of these bodies in bone correlates to the increase in adiposity. The hematopoietic type of
these bodies, from which blood cells ultimately derive, is found in bone marrow and can be
transplanted to treat leukemia. Sometimes sourced from embryos, these are, for the point,
what undifferentiated cells which can multiply indefinitely and generate various other types
of cells?

ANSWER: Stem Cells (accept Mesenchymal Stem Cells; accept Hematopoietic Stem Cells;
accept Embryonic Stem Cells or other specific types)

(6)     Animals exhibiting this behavior only do so during a specific time span in what is
termed as the “critical stage," which was determined by Konrad Lorenz as 32 hours after
hatching. Lorenz, who coined the term for this behavior, observed it during an experiment
after hatching graylag geese eggs from an incubator. A group of baby ducks following their
mother displays the filial form of, for the point, what instinctive behavior exhibited when
animals form an attachment to their first visual target?

ANSWER: Imprinting (accept Filial Imprinting before mentioned; accept Limbic
Imprinting; accept Sexual Imprinting)

(7)    In the ELISA assay, the primary and secondary varieties of these molecules can be
used to detect the target protein of interest. These molecules, which are made up of four
polypeptide chains, are divided into two Fab fragments and one Fc fragment, and vaccines
stimulate the production of these molecules in order to provide immunity against diseases.
Immunoglobulin is another name for, for the point, what Y-shaped proteins that regulate
the immune response by binding to an antigen?

ANSWER: Antibody (or Antibodies; accept Immunoglobulins before mentioned)

(8)     Of the three components of this quantity’s operator in quantum mechanics, only one
can be measured with certainty due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. This quantity
is constant in precession where there is no torque. The conservation of this quantity implies
Kepler’s second law, and its time derivative is torque. For the point, name this rotational
analogue of linear momentum.

ANSWER: Angular momentum (prompt on “momentum”, do not accept or prompt on
“linear momentum”)

(9)    This region’s existence was first documented by Sir Joseph Norman Lockyer, and the
density of this region renders it invisible to the naked eye, except in times of a solar eclipse.
This region features dynamic jets of plasma called spicules, which emerge from its
homogenous layer. For the point, name this middle layer of the Sun’s atmosphere, sitting
between the solar transition region and the photosphere.

ANSWER: Chromosphere
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                       Round 3


(10) Brunhes and Mutayama name an event in which this entity last underwent a radical
change. The origin of this entity can be explained by the dynamo effect, and reversals in this
entity correspond to stripes on the ocean floor. The interaction of charged particles with
this entity creates the aurora borealis, or the “Northern Lights.” For the point, name this
entity which causes compasses on the Blue Planet to align with the poles.

ANSWER: Earth’s Magnetic Field (or Geomagnetic Field; accept Earth's Magnetic Poles;
prompt on partial answers)

(11) He’s not Newton, but this man postulated that visual rays proceed from the eyes
onto objects in his book Optics. A “space” named after this man is the fundamental space of
geometry. This man proved that there are infinitely many primes by constructing their
product plus one. The parallel postulate is found in one set of writings by this man. For the
point, name this mathematician from Alexandria who wrote the landmark math treatise
Elements.

ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria (accept Euclidean Space)

(12) This object was called Stella Maris in the medieval period, and this object was
preceded in its role by Kochab and Pherkad. This object's southern counterpart is called
Sigma Octantis, and in Lakota this celestial object is known as "The Star that Sits Still." For
the point, name this brightest star of Ursa Minor, or the "Little Dipper," often called the
"North Star."

ANSWER: Polaris (accept Alpha Ursae Minoris until mentioned; prompt on "North Star"
or "Pole Star" until mentioned)

(13) This function can be estimated via the Babylonian method, and its graph makes up
half a parabola with a vertical directrix. Applications of this function include determining
the length of vectors and the geometric mean. This function appears above 5 in the
numerator of the Golden Ratio and can be expressed as the one-half power in exponential
notation. For the point, name this function, which when applied to negative one is i and
when applied to 9 is 3.

ANSWER: square root

(14) It’s not palladium, but this hetero-atom is found in an organo-metallic species in the
Suzuki reaction. This second-row element is used to yield an alcohol in an anti-Markovnikov
reaction from an alkene. This element usually only forms three bonds to other elements,
resulting in an empty p-orbital. The lightest metalloid is, for the point, what element with
atomic symbolized B?

ANSWER: Boron (accept B before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                     Round 3


(15) This quantity can be replaced with Hammett’s function in very concentrated
solutions. The value of this quantity is low for systems containing an abundance of
hydronium ions. The isoelectric point of a molecule is this quantity when the net charge is
zero. When this quantity is low for a solution, litmus paper turns red, and blood usually has
a value of about 7.4 for this quantity. For the point, name this measure of the acidity of a
solution.

ANSWER: pH (accept Power of hydrogen)

(16) Climates in this biome are categorized under ET in the Koppen climate classification.
Soil in this biome often contains large amounts of biomass stored as methane under layers
of permafrost. This biome can be found in mostly arctic, alpine, and Antarctic variants. For
the point, name this biome characterized by little tree growth, low rain and snowfall, and
extensive moss and lichen growth.

ANSWER: Tundra

(17) While the "complacent" type of these features show little variation, "sensitive" types
allow for easier cross-dating to assign dates to when they were formed. These things, which
are compared on skeleton plots, are "crowded" during periods of drought.
Dendrochronology is the process of dating these things, which are affected by amounts of
rainfall and are found in the cambium. For the point, name these circular patterns found in
wood.

ANSWER: Tree Rings (accept Growth Rings)

(18) Cleveland Abbe was nicknamed "Old Probability" for his reliability in this task. J.M.
Stagg performed this task in preparation for D-Day. Edward Lorenz believed that the long-
term performance of this task was impossible due to the butterfly effect. Remote sensing
and radiosondes [["radio"-sahndz]] are used in this task, which is performed pseudo-
scientifically on February 2nd with a groundhog. For the point, name this task commonly
performed by a meteorologist, who might state that rain is likely tomorrow.

ANSWER: Weather forecasting (accept answers indicating Forecasting the weather; or
Predicting the weather or Modeling the weather; prompt on partial answers; accept
meteorology before "meteorologist")

(19) The predecessors of these rocks undergo diagenesis. Arkose is a feldspar-rich
variant of one example of these rocks, while another example of these rocks is primarily
composed of calcite and aragonite. Sandstone and limestone are examples of these rocks.
For the point, name these rocks that are formed from cementation of particles and are
contrasted with igneous and metamorphic rocks.

ANSWER: Sedimentary rocks (prompt on “sandstone” or “limestone” before mentioned)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                        Round 3


(20) An equation named for this scientist is solved by the Hartree-Fock and WKB
approximations. The time-independent form of an equation named for this man is written
as "H psi equals E psi". This man critiqued the Copenhagen interpretation by proposing a
situation in which a radioactive source causes a hammer to break open a flask of poison. A
thought experiment about a cat that is simultaneously alive and dead was proposed by, for
the point, what Austrian physicist?

ANSWER: Erwin Schrödinger (accept Schrödinger's cat; accept Schrödinger equation)

(21) KGB intervention may have caused the death of this man and instructor Vladimir
Seryogin during a routine flight in 1968. Nazi occupation forced this man and his family to
live in a three-meter by three-meter mud hut for years, and this man shouted "Poyekhali!"
or, "Off we go," shortly before departing from Baikonur Cosmodrome on Vostok One. For
the point, name this Soviet Cosmonaut, the first man in space.

ANSWER: Yuri Gagarin

(22) Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel is a thought experiment that illustrates the
counterintuitivity of sets with this property. Georg Cantor denoted a "countable" variety of
this property aleph-null. Euclid proved that there are this many prime numbers, while
irrational numbers have this many digits after the decimal point. For the point, name this
mathematical property denoting a number that is uncountably large.

ANSWER: Infinity (accept countable infinity)

(23) The 1902 poem “The Story of Fidgety Philip” made an early reference to these
disorders, one of which was referred to by a German neurologist as “word blindness."
Dyscalculia is one of these disorders affecting numerical reasoning, and dyslexia is another
disorder of this type affecting literacy. Ritalin and Adderall are used to treat, for the point,
what disorders in school-aged children?

ANSWER: Learning Disorders (or Learning Disabilities; accept Neurodevelopmental
Disorders; ask for less specific information on answers such as "ADHD", "Dyslexia", or other
learning disorders)

(24) In order to correct for the Signor-Lipps effect, the location of where these objects
end up are assumed to be in random order. Coprolites [[KAH-pruh-lites]] are an example of
the "trace" type of these objects, and geologic relationships can be determined using their
"index" type. The Burgess Shale is a source of, for the point, what preserved objects that a
paleontologist might find at a dig site?

ANSWER: Fossils (accept Trace Fossils or Index Fossils or Fossilized Remains; prompt on
“Bone” or “Skeleton” or “Remains”)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                    Round 3


(25) This body was systematically observed by the Babylonians during ancient times and
was visited by the Pioneer and Voyager probes. Features of this celestial body include
depressions known as "tiger stripes" and periodic storms like the Great White Spot. The
Cassini division can be found within a feature of this planet, which is orbited by the moons
Rhea and Titan. An extensive ring system belongs to, for the point, what sixth planet from
the Sun?

ANSWER: Saturn

(26) The no-hair theorem states that these entities can be characterized by just their
mass, charge, and angular momentum. These objects are bound by the Schwarzschild
radius, and thermal radiation can be emitted by these entities in a mechanism proposed by
Steven Hawking. The surface boundary of these objects is their event horizon, past which
nothing can be observed. For the point, name these regions of spacetime with gravity so
strong, even light cannot escape it.

ANSWER: Black holes

(27) Heinrich Gerber is best known for a component used to make these structures,
which he invented. One type of these structures can be built using cantilevers and hinges.
Elementary forced resonance is given as the reason for why two of these structures named
for Tacoma Narrows collapsed in 1940. For the point, name these structures built over
bodies of water, famous ones of which include London and Golden Gate.

ANSWER: Bridges (accept Tacoma Narrows Bridge; accept London Bridge; accept Golden
Gate Bridge)

(28) This country's Hamelin Pool hosts the most abundant examples of living
stromatolites in the world. The extremely rare ant genus Nothomyrmecia lives in the south
of this country, and the devil facial tumor disease has affected a carnivorous marsupial,
Sarcophilus harrisii, from this country. Animals such as the kookaburra and wallaby are
native to, for the point, what country, whose researchers often study the Tasmanian devil?

ANSWER: Australia (or Commonwealth of Australia)

(29) A transversal line that crosses the sides of this shape creates segments related by
Menelaus’s theorem. The Minkowski inequality is a generalization of a statement named for
this shape. The area of this shape can be found by multiplying the semiperimeter and
inradius, or it can be calculated using Heron’s formula. For the point, name this geometric
shape that comes in “obtuse” and “acute” varieties and has three sides.

ANSWER: Triangle (accept obtuse triangle; accept acute triangle)
2022 Middle School National Science Bee                                                      Round 3


(30) Pinnules [[PIN-yoolz]] are found on these structures in beard worms, and the nose
of the star-nosed mole is surrounded by 22 of these structures. Anthozoans [[AN-thuh-ZOH-
inz]] have cnidocytes [[NY-doh-"sites"]] on these structures, and some ctenophores [[TEH-
nuh-FORZ]] have retractable these structures that feature sticky colloblasts. A squid has
eight arms and two of these structures, which are used for seizing prey. For the point, name
these appendages that are covered with stinging cells in jellyfish.

ANSWER: Tentacles (prompt on "Limb" or “Leg” or “Ray”; prompt on “Arm” before “arms”
is mentioned; prompt on “Appendage” before “appendages” is mentioned)



Extra Questions
(1)     A substance referred to as “virga” can be released from these objects that can be
divided into roll and shelf types. Human activity can form instances of these entities known
as contrails, while nacreous varieties of these entities form above the stratosphere. The
appearance of halos from these objects form via the passage of sun light through crystals of
ice in the cirrus varieties of these objects. Cumulonimbus is one variety of, for the point,
what fluffy white objects in the sky?

ANSWER: Clouds (accept Roll Clouds; accept Shelf Clouds; accept Nacreous Clouds; accept
Cirrus Clouds; accept Anvil Clouds; accept Cumulonimbus Clouds)

(2)      One condition that affects this body part is called stenosis, in which bone spurs
appear due to the narrowing of the canal found in this body part. Another condition that
affects this body part is spondylosis, while in another condition, curvatures resembling the
letters “C” or “S” is used to diagnose scoliosis, an abnormal curvature of this body part. The
cervical, thoracic, and lumbar are groups of vertebrae in, for the point, what part of the
body, also called the backbone?

ANSWER: Spine (accept Backbone before mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                            Science Bee 1 - Round 3



Science Bee 1 - Round 3
Round 3 tossups
(1)    Organisms in this kingdom have cell walls made of chitin [[KAI-tin]]. Algae and these
organisms form a symbiotic relationship in lichen, and the death cap is a highly poisonous
organism in this kingdom. These organisms have hyphae which make up their mycelium,
and examples of these organisms include molds and yeasts. For the point, name this
kingdom of organisms which are primarily decomposers, like mushrooms.

ANSWER: fungi (or funguses)

(2)      On the periodic table, this quantity tends to increase when moving from the bottom
left to the top right, excluding the noble gases. Cesium has the lowest value of this quantity,
and fluorine has the highest value for this quantity of any element. This quantity is
measured on the Pauling scale. For the point, name this measurement of an atom's ability to
attract electrons.

ANSWER: electronegativity

(3)     On Saturn, one of these phenomena formed a hexagon shape at the north pole. On
Earth, these phenomena typically contain the polar vortices. The subtropical variety of
these weather phenomena forms along Hadley Cells. Flights from East Asia to North
America can reduce fuel usage by utilizing these phenomena. For the point, name these
rapidly moving bands of air located in the upper atmosphere.

ANSWER: jet stream (prompt on "wind, "air movement," and similar answers)

(4)     This scientist compiled selections from five classical texts of physics and astronomy
in his book On the Shoulders of Giants. This scientist lends his name to the radiation that
slowly decays black holes. This scientist wrote the pop-science books The Theory of
Everything and A Brief History of Time. For the point, name this British astrophysicist, who
was confined to a wheelchair due to ALS.

ANSWER: Stephen Hawking

(5)      Observing double beta decay without emission of these particles would prove that
they are their own antiparticles. Observatories built to detect these particles include Super-
Kamiokande and one called IceCube which is found underground at the South Pole. Flavor
oscillation allows these fermions [[FERM-EYE-ONS]] to switch between their tau, muon, and
electron subtypes. For the point, name these nearly massless particles with no charge which
rarely interact with matter.

ANSWER: neutrinos (accept tau neutrinos; accept muon neutrinos; accept electron
neutrinos; prompt on "fermions" before mentioned; do not accept or prompt on
"neutrons")
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                          Science Bee 1 - Round 3


(6)     At all input values with this property, the Dirichlet [[dee-ree-SHLAY]] function
equals zero. All infinite continued fractions represent numbers with this property. The roots
of a polynomial with leading coefficient one must be either integers or have this property,
which is possessed by numbers whose decimal expansions do not repeat or terminate. The
golden ratio and pi have, for the point, what property of numbers that cannot be
represented as the quotient of two integers?

ANSWER: irrational numbers (do not accept or prompt on "rational")

(7)     Examples of an aggressive form of this phenomenon include the angler fish's light
organ and the alligator snapping turtle's tongue. The Müllerian [[myoo-LEHR-ee-an]] form
of this phenomenon works through strengthening conditioned responses. The Batesian
form of this phenomenon involves harmless creatures appearing harmful. For the point,
name this phenomenon in which one creature evolves to take on the appearance of another.

ANSWER: mimicry (accept mimicking; prompt on descriptive answers involving creatures
taking on the appearance of another)

(8)     With copper, this element forms Gilman reagents. When combined with aluminum
hydride, this element forms a powerful reducing agent used in organic synthesis. As does
strontium, this element burns crimson during flame tests. This element is the base of a
common bipolar medication, and ions of this element are frequently used in rechargeable
batteries. For the point, name this lightest alkali metal with atomic number 3.

ANSWER: lithium

(9)     The "dark" type of these entities blocks light from their "emission" and "reflection"
types. The Hubble space telescope photographed the "Pillars of Creation," which are located
in one of these entities. Messier 1 is one of these objects which corresponds with a
supernova seen by Chinese astronomers in 1054. For the point, name these astronomical
star-forming regions, examples of which include the “eagle” and “crab.”

ANSWER: nebulae (or nebulas)

(10) The residual strong force prevents the breakdown of these structures by
overcoming electromagnetic repulsion. These structures were proven to exist in an
experiment in which alpha particles were fired at a gold foil. The existence of these
structures was proven by Ernst Rutherford. For the point, name this collection of neutrons
and protons at the center of an atom.

ANSWER: atomic nucleus
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                          Science Bee 1 - Round 3


(11) Inventors in this country developed an earthquake detector which featured dragons
dropping metal balls into the mouths of frogs. This country was home to the first rockets,
which were used to propel arrows. Historical inventions from this country include the
compass, paper, and gunpowder. For the point, name this country whose military
technological developments occurred during dynasties such as the Han and Ming.

ANSWER: China (or Zhongguo)

(12) This quantity for a matrix's column space is known as its "rank." The cardinality, or
number of vectors in the basis of a vector space, equals this quantity, which is also
represented by the variable "n" in a topological n-manifold. A tesseract has a value of four
for this quantity, which is the minimum number of coordinates required to specify a point in
space. For the point, name this quantity which equals three for a cube and one for a line.

ANSWER: number of dimensions

(13) The nucleolus is known for its synthesis of these organelles. Mitochondria have their
own versions of these organelles which have an A, P, and E site. A nucleic acid with a clover
leaf structure brings amino acids to this organelle, and the rough endoplasmic reticulum has
these organelles attached to it. tRNA and mRNA are involved in translation, a process that
happens in, for the point, what organelles which manufacture cellular proteins?

ANSWER: ribosomes

(14) A supercritical fluid made of this compound can be used to decaffeinate coffee.
Ocean acidification is primarily a result of this compound being dissolved into water. Along
with water vapor, this compound is produced as the result of a complete combustion
reaction. As a solid, this compound is known as dry ice. For the point, name this greenhouse
gas which is released by the burning of fossil fuels.

ANSWER: carbon dioxide (or CO2)

(15) A "threshold" value for this quantity controls carrier concentration in a MOSFET. A
conductor's impedance can be used to calculate the namesake "drop" in this quantity
between the source and load. Kirchoff's [[KEERCH-hoffs]] loop rule states that the sum of
this quantity around any closed loop is zero. This quantity is the product of current and
resistance according to Ohm's law. Batteries are used as a source of, for the point, what
measure of electrical potential?

ANSWER: voltage (or EMF; or electromotive force; accept electric potential before
mentioned; accept scalar potential before mentioned; accept voltage drop)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                            Science Bee 1 - Round 3


(16) This scientist collected his ideas in the books The Two Chief Sciences and Dialogue
Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. This scientist proved that bodies can orbit objects
besides the Earth by observing his namesake moons of Jupiter. This scientist tested the
universal acceleration of gravity by dropping different weights from the Leaning Tower of
Pisa. For the point, name this Italian scientist who was condemned by the Inquisition for
supporting heliocentrism.

ANSWER: Galileo Galilei (accept Galilei)

(17) This island is home to the world's smallest known reptile, the nano-chameleon. This
island's largest native predator is the fossa [[FOO-sah]]. This island was once home to the
world's largest known bird, the elephant bird. This island's native primates include the silky
sifaka and the aye aye. This island is also home to the majority of the world's baobab trees.
For the point, name this African island nation.

ANSWER: Republic of Madagascar

(18) This quantity is defined as the negative logarithm of a solution’s proton
concentration. Mixing compounds with a large difference in this value can lead to a
neutralization reaction. A solution’s value for this quantity can be estimated with an
indicator, and changes in this quantity are modulated by buffer solutions. For the point,
name this scale which ranges from one to fourteen with low values for acids and high values
for bases?

ANSWER: pH scale

(19) If this rock undergoes metamorphosis, it becomes marble. Compressed plankton can
be formed into a type of this rock called chalk. This rock can be created through the
deposition of mollusk shells. Because this rock is easily dissolved in acidic water, most caves
are found in bedrock made of this rock. For the point, name this sedimentary rock which is
primarily formed from calcium carbonate.

ANSWER: limestone (prompt on "calcite"; prompt on "calcium carbonate" before read)

(20) In 1969, the FDA banned one of these substances called cyclamate due to it having
caused bladder cancer in lab rats. Consuming these substances has been linked to insulin
resistance due to changes in gut bacteria. Common varieties of these substances include
aspartame, sucralose, and saccharin. Popular brands selling these substances include Stevia
and Splenda. For the point, name these food additives, which replace sugar in diet soda.

ANSWER: artificial sweeteners (or nonnutritive sweetener; or low-calorie sweetener;
or zero-calorie sweetener; accept sugar replacements or sugar substitutes before
"sugar" is read; prompt on just "sweetener")
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                             Science Bee 1 - Round 3


(21) An ester linkage of this element makes up the "high-energy" bond of acetyl-CoA
[[uh-SEE-til KOH-ay]]. Mitochondrial proteins with clusters of iron and this element
transport electrons. Proteins contain namesake "bridges" of this element which are only
found in the amino acids methionine and cysteine. The prefixes "mercapto-" and "thio-"
refer to this bright yellow element. Rotten eggs release a gas containing, for the point, what
element with chemical symbol S?

ANSWER: sulfur (accept S before mentioned)

(22) Description acceptable. Spreiten formations preserve evidence of this behavior
which is performed by insects with fossorial legs. The only eusocial mammal lives in homes
built by this activity, for which the wombat's backward-facing pouch is an adaptation.
Ferrets specialize in hunting prey that hides by this behavior, such as prairie dogs. Badgers
and moles engage in, for the point, what behavior of digging underground chambers?

ANSWER: burrowing (or tunneling; accept digging before it is read; accept any answer
that describes making passages underground or homes in the soil)

(23) This phenomenon is directly proportional to volume when pressure is held
constant, according to Charles's law. This phenomenon is measured in chemical reactions
by a calorimeter. Exothermic reactions are characterized by the release of this
phenomenon. This type of energy is transferred through convection, conduction, and
radiation. For the point, name this type of energy which is measured in degrees Fahrenheit.

ANSWER: heat (prompt on "energy" before mentioned)

(24) In an attempt to discredit George Westinghouse, this scientist gave animals electric
shocks from alternating and direct current as part of the "War of the Currents." This
scientist created an early way to record sounds with his invention called a "phonograph."
This inventor and rival of Nikola Tesla was known as the "Wizard of Menlo Park." For the
point, name this American inventor, who developed the most popular incandescent light
bulb.

ANSWER: Thomas Edison

(25) A cycle between muscle and this organ regenerates glucose from lactate through a
pyruvate intermediate. In addition to being the site of the Cori cycle, this organ is divided by
the falciform ligament. Macrophages in this organ include Kupffer cells. This four-lobed
organ has the ability to regenerate, and the hepatic portal vein brings nutrients to this
organ. For the point, name this organ which is the site of detoxification.

ANSWER: liver
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                             Science Bee 1 - Round 3


(26) The retention of the structure of these objects at high rotational speeds led to the
discovery of dark matter. These objects make up the right end of the "Hubble tuning fork"
diagram. These objects are subclassified based on whether or not they are "barred." These
objects have greater order than their lenticular, elliptical, or irregular counterparts. For the
point, name this type of galaxy which includes the Andromeda and is shaped like a
whirlpool.

ANSWER: spiral galaxies (or barred spiral galaxies; prompt on "galaxies")

(27) This substance is turned into more useable forms through fluid catalytic cracking.
The Bakken formation contains this substance's namesake kind of shale. In Alberta, Canada,
this substance is extracted in the form of bitumen [[BIT-yoo-men]] from a namesake kind of
sand. This substance can be fractionally distilled into substances such as asphalt, kerosene,
or gasoline. For the point, name this liquid fossil which is mined by drilling at namesake
wells.

ANSWER: Crude oil (or petroleum; accept crude)

(28) In 2019, this company partnered with Worldpay to expand access to their own
namesake payment services. This company's cloud computing web services are used by the
NFL to create Next Gen Stats. This company's subsidiaries include Twitch, Goodreads, and
Audible, and this company's streaming service and complimentary two-day delivery is
included in its Prime service. For the point, name this online shopping company, which was
formerly headed by Jeff Bezos.

ANSWER: Amazon.com, Inc.

(29) These features can be identified by the presence of tektite and a shatter cone. Many
examples of these features in the inner solar system were formed during the Late Heavy
Bombardment. One of these features located off of the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico is linked
to an event that may have caused the dinosaurs to go extinct. For the point, name these
geologic features which consist of a depression on the surface of a body created by the
impact of a meteor or asteroid.

ANSWER: impact craters (accept meteorite crater and similar answers; do not accept or
prompt on "volcanic crater")

(30) The "HPHT" and "CVD" types of this substance are created in a laboratory. The
Vickers test uses a pyramid-shaped piece of this mineral to create indents. Pandanus
candelabrum is used to detect this mineral from kimberlite pipes. High-leaded glass and
cubic zirconia are common “simulants” for this mineral which has a Mohs hardness of ten.
For the point, name this very hard mineral made of carbon.

ANSWER: diamond
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                         Science Bee 1 - Round 3


Extra Question
(1)     Inside this body part, calcium carbonate crystals called otoliths float in a viscous
fluid within sacs called the utricle and saccule. The ossicles of this organ consist of the
malleus, incus, and stapes [[STAY-pees]], which are collectively the smallest bones in the
body. Tinnitus can result from damage to this organ's tympanic membrane, which focuses
vibrational waves towards the cochlea. For the point, name this organ which perceives
sound.

ANSWER: ears (accept inner ear; accept middle ear)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                           Science Bee 1 - Round 2



Science Bee 1 - Round 2
Round 2 tossups
(1)     This non-human animal is used to prepare tetanus antitoxin in much of the
developing world. Nikolai Przewalski [[shuh-VAL-skee]] names one species of this animal
whose leg length is a common textbook example of directional selection. Tiny Eohippus was
an early ancestor of this animal, whose modern breeds include the Clydesdale. A close
relative of zebras, for the point, what is this domesticated animal which can be saddled for
riding?

ANSWER: horse (accept Equus or Equine)

(2)      Lyophilic types of these substances are more stable than lyophobic ones. Adding
clarifying agents to these substances can cause flocculation. Solid foam and sols are
examples of these substances, and the scattering of light by these substances is stronger for
blue light than red light in the Tyndall effect. For the point, name these mixtures in which
one substance is dispersed in another, exemplified by aerosols and milk.

ANSWER: colloids

(3)     This material is the primary component of the Lunar Maria on the surface of the
moon. This material formed hexagonal columns in North Ireland, creating the Giant's
Causeway. Massive deposits of this material are called "floods" and are created by large
volcanic eruptions. Oceanic crust is primarily made out of this rock. For the point, name this
fine-grained extrusive igneous rock, formed from the rapid cooling of lava.

ANSWER: basalt

(4)    Random types of these constructs are called Las Vegas or Monte Carlo depending on
whether they can fail. Two of these constructs named for Kruskal and Prim are "greedy,"
meaning they always make the locally optimal choice. "Big O" notation describes the
runtime of these methods, which can use a "divide-and-conquer" technique. Search and sort
can be performed by, for the point, what step-by-step methods used by computers to solve
problems?

ANSWER: algorithms

(5)     This organization's YouTube channel produces the Eons series, which covers
evolution and ancient life forms. This organization also distributes the Nova pop-science
series. Chris and Martin Kratt have starred in two animal science programs for this
organization, starting with Zoboombafoo. The television counterpart of NPR, for the point,
what is this educational television non-profit, which airs shows such as Sesame Street and
Arthur?

ANSWER: PBS (or Public Broadcasting Service)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                          Science Bee 1 - Round 2


(6)     Because the model organism Chlamydomonas has a single, large one of these
organelles, mutants lacking carotenoids are easy to spot. Mesophyll tissue is rich in this
organelle whose stroma contains rubisco enzyme for the Calvin cycle, and whose thylakoid
membranes are the location of light-dependent reactions. Oxygen gas is released from, for
the point, which green organelles of plant cells, the sites of photosynthesis?

ANSWER: Chloroplasts

(7)     This process is described by a set of laws named for Alfred Fick. This process can be
modeled as a random walk or as Brownian motion. A type of this process exhibited by water
is known as osmosis. This process is driven by concentration gradients and can be
visualized with the spread of dye through water. For the point, name this process by which
matter moves from areas of high to low concentration.

ANSWER: diffusion

(8)     One of these astronomical bodies has a satellite named Dactyl. A region with many
of these bodies was visited by the Dawn spacecraft. These bodies make up the Jovian
Trojans, and gaps where these bodies are not found are named after Daniel Kirkwood. One
of the largest of these bodies is called Vesta which is found in a region between Mars and
Jupiter. For the point, name these astronomical bodies which make up a namesake "belt" in
the solar system.

ANSWER: asteroids

(9)    These devices can emit pulses through Q-switching, and in order to operate, these
devices require more particles to be in an excited state than a ground state, a condition
known as population inversion. The first one of these devices was made by Theodore
Maiman using a ruby crystal. These devices operate through stimulated emission of their
gain medium. For the point, name these devices which emit a coherent beam of light.

ANSWER: lasers (or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation)

(10) A preliminary step for making this product involves treating its ingredients with
water, sodium hydroxide, and sodium sulfide in the Kraft process. The bleaching of this
product with elemental chlorine produces toxic chlorine dioxin compounds. After being
introduced to the Islamic world, this product began to replace parchment and papyrus. For
the point, name this product which is made from wood pulp and is commonly written on
with pencils.

ANSWER: paper
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                          Science Bee 1 - Round 2


(11) This quantity appears squared in the denominator of Chebyshev's inequality.
Calculating the Z-score requires dividing by this quantity, which is also divided by the
square root of the sample size to find standard error. The 68-95-99.7 rule for a normal
distribution is defined using multiples of this quantity, which is the square root of the
variance. For the point, name this quantity symbolized "sigma" which represents how
spread out a set of data is from the mean.

ANSWER: standard deviation

(12) During mitosis, chromosomes condense within these organelles which are
surrounded by a double membrane known as their "envelope." Pore complexes allow RNA
to travel in and out of these organelles, and these organelles are sometimes called the
"control center" of the cell. For the point, name these organelles, which contain the cell's
genetic information.

ANSWER: cell nucleus

(13) Like chromium, this element leaves its 4s [[FOUR-ESS]] subshell half full in violation
of the Aufbau principle. This element gives crustaceans blue blood due to its presence in
hemocyanin. When combined with tin, this element forms bronze and when combined with
zinc it forms brass. As this element oxidizes, it turns blue-green. This is the most commonly
used element in electrical wires. For the point, name this transition metal element,
symbolized Cu [[SEE-YOO]].

ANSWER: copper

(14) This region's lower part contains the D-double-prime layer while peridotite and
olivine are prevalent in its upper part. The boundary between the lithosphere and
asthenosphere is in this region. P waves can pass through this region but not the layer
beneath it. “Plumes” in this region may drive its convection which causes seafloor
spreading. For the point, name this layer of the earth above the outer core and below the
crust.

ANSWER: mantle

(15) The namesake "law of" these devices states that the torque applied to both sides of
these devices must be equivalent. These devices are divided into Classes 1, 2, and 3 based
on the location of the fulcrum. These devices derive more mechanical advantage from
having longer arms, which reduce the amount of force needed to be applied over a longer
distance. For the point, name these simple machines exemplified by a seesaw.

ANSWER: levers
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                            Science Bee 1 - Round 2


(16) Setting a "characteristic" one of these objects to zero allows Eigenvalues for a matrix
to be found. These objects of degree five or higher cannot be solved algebraically. These
objects can be factored using difference of cubes or difference of squares, and can be
multiplied out using FOIL. For the point, name these objects with integer powers of
variables, such as cubics and quadratics.

ANSWER: polynomials

(17) During this process, Aurora B kinase localizes to a namesake "spindle." In
monocentric organisms undergoing this process, the kinetochore is localized. In one step of
this process, chromosomes line up on a “plate.” This part of the cell cycle occurs after the G2
phase and ends at cytokinesis, and steps in this process include metaphase and anaphase.
For the point, name this process by which cells divide, contrasted with meiosis.

ANSWER: mitosis (accept anaphase; accept metaphase)

(18) An organic chemistry reaction that cleaves alkenes and alkynes uses “lysis” by this
molecule. Elastomers such as rubber can be “cracked” by this molecule. The amount of this
substance is measured from a vertical column using Dobson units. Chlorofluorocarbons
deplete a “layer” containing this protective molecule which absorbs ultraviolet radiation.
For the point, name this triatomic molecule present in the atmosphere with chemical
formula O3 [[OH-THREE]].

ANSWER: ozone (accept O3 before mentioned)

(19) Types of this material that can be blown in the wind as dust are known as loess
[[LOH-us]]. This material can be stripped of salt and nutrients through leaching with water.
A variety of this material generally high in humus [[HYOO-mus]] is called loam. Strata of this
material are known as horizons, and this material is classified by how much sand, silt, and
clay it contains. For the point, name this material in which seeds are typically planted.

ANSWER: soil (or dirt)

(20) Because of the existence of virtual particles, these objects can "evaporate." Reinhard
Genzel, Andrea Ghez, and Roger Penrose won the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics for a
discovery regarding a supermassive one of these objects called Sagittarius A-star. For non-
rotating examples of these objects, the Schwarzschild radius defines the event horizon. For
the point, name these objects from which not even light can escape.

ANSWER: black holes (do not accept or prompt on "singularity")
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                         Science Bee 1 - Round 2


(21) The earliest evidence for the controlled use of this phenomenon is at the
Wonderwerk Cave in South Africa. Homo erectus was likely the first species to directly
initiate use of this phenomenon. Early methods for manually inducing this phenomenon
included bow drills and striking metal on flint. For the point, name this phenomenon often
used historically as a heat source to cook food.

ANSWER: fire (accept burning, flames, or equivalents; prompt on "cooking")

(22) Beta-blockers are now less preferable to lower this quantity than ACE inhibitors,
which act by causing vasodilation. A sphygmomanometer is used to measure this quantity
whose systolic and diastolic components can be determined manually using a stethoscope
and an inflatable cuff which wraps around the arm. A normal value of 120 over 80
millimeters mercury characterizes, for the point, what cardiovascular quantity?

ANSWER: blood pressure (accept BP)

(23) At fertilization, there is a spike in the concentration of this element in the cytosol,
known as its namesake "bomb" or "wave." This element’s plus 2 cation [[KAT-eye-on]] is
stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells. Sunlight helps the body produce
vitamin D, which helps absorb this element. For the point, name this element which is found
in bones and has symbol Ca. [[SEE-AY]]

ANSWER: calcium (or Ca+2)

(24) One theory suggests that this phenomenon is mediated by a massless, spin two
boson. Observations of a solar eclipse proved that this phenomenon is capable of bending
light as part of its namesake "lensing." This force is conceptualized as curvature of space-
time in relativity. On Earth, this force causes an acceleration of 9.8 meters per second
squared. For the point. name this weakest of the fundamental forces, which causes objects
to fall to the ground.

ANSWER: gravity

(25) This technology was part of the Kyocera VP-210, the first cell phone equipped with
this technology. In addition to audio connection, Securus Technology provides this service
to prison inmates. Along with instant messaging, this is the primary service provided by
Google Hangout. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, most schools have been forced to remotely
operate over these services. For the point, name this service provided by Skype, Facetime,
and Zoom.

ANSWER: video calling (or video conferencing; or videotelephony; accept similar
answers referring to calls by video; do not accept or prompt on "phone calls")
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                            Science Bee 1 - Round 2


(26) In these structures, water is forced into the symplast by the suberin-containing
Casparian strip. It’s not the shoot, but these structures grow at their “apical meristem” and
are positively geotropic. Cytokinins regulate the growth of these structures, which are
“aerial” in mangroves. Rutabagas and carrots are examples of these organs. For the point,
name these plant structures which draw up water and nutrients from the ground.

ANSWER: roots

(27) Rock formations common to these biomes include hamadas and ergs. CAM and C4
photosynthesis evolved among plants in these biomes, which are home to the majority of
the world's xerophytes. These biomes commonly form in the "rain shadow" of mountain
ranges. These biomes and beaches are home to most of the world's sand dunes. For the
point, name these extremely arid regions, exemplified by the Sahara.

ANSWER: deserts

(28) This quantity is minimized in binary mixtures at the eutectic point. For water
compounds, this quantity can be found by multiplying the molality by 1.86 as part of a
coligitive "depression" property. The addition of sodium chloride causes this point to lower
for water, allowing it to be used to de-ice roads. For the point, name this temperature at
which a phase change causes liquids to turn into solids.

ANSWER: freezing point (or melting point)

(29) This order is subdivided into strepsirrhines and haplorhines, meaning "twisted
nostril" and "simple noses" respectively. Unusually, most members of this order cannot
synthesize vitamin C. The colugo is the closest relative of this order, whose members
include galagos, tarsiers, and lorises. For the point, name this taxonomic order which
includes lemurs, monkeys, and apes and is defined by having opposable thumbs.

ANSWER: primates (do not accept "primata" or "primatamorpha")

(30) Voyager discovered a cloud pattern at this planet's north pole called its "hexagon."
Depressions on the surface of a moon of this planet have been nicknamed "tiger stripes."
Another moon of this planet, Prometheus, is a shepherd moon, and the Cassini division is
present in an important feature on this planet. Having the lowest density of any planet in
the solar system, for the point, what is this sixth planet from the sun known for its extensive
ring system?

ANSWER: Saturn
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                        Science Bee 1 - Round 2


Extra Question
(1)    The namesake "overturning" of these locations can result in the release of deadly
Mazuku, fast-moving clouds of carbon dioxide. Two of these locations in Cameroon are the
only ones known to have experienced limnic eruptions. These locations can become
extremely saline when they are endorheic, or lack outflows. For the point, name these non-
flowing bodies of water which include examples named Superior, Michigan, and Huron.

ANSWER: lakes
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                             Science Bee 1 - Round 1



Science Bee 1 - Round 1
Round 1 tossups
(1)     When these structures are "cultured," they can be in suspension or adherent.
Matthias Schleiden and Theodor Schwann developed a theory of these structures which has
three tenets. A “cycle” named for these structures includes steps like G2, S, and M. These
structures possess an outer “wall” and membrane in plants but only a membrane in animals.
For the point, name these building blocks of life which contain organelles.

ANSWER: cells

(2)     This word describes a type of crystalline substance that exists in either smectic or
nematic phases while in its thermotropic variety. The HPLC-type of chromatography uses a
highly pressurized solvent in this state, which is also bypassed by substances that undergo
deposition and sublimation. At negative 196 degrees Celsius, nitrogen exists in this state.
For the point, name this state of matter formed when substances melt.

ANSWER: liquid (accept liquid crystal; accept liquid nitrogen)

(3)      The transfer of these particles is the central mechanism of redox reactions. A Lewis
acid is defined by its ability to form a covalent bond with one of these particles. The addition
of these particles can lead to the formation of an anion [[AN-eye-on]]. These particles form a
namesake "cloud" composed of orbitals. For the point, name these subatomic particles with
a negative charge.

ANSWER: electrons

(4)     Replacing one atom in this compound with deuterium gives its "heavy" form.
Microwave ovens primarily work by heating this compound in food due to its large dipole
moment. The presence of a lone pair on this compound's oxygen atom gives it a bent
geometry. This polar compound is known as the "universal solvent." For the point, name
this compound composed of one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms.

ANSWER: water (or H2O)

(5)     This object can be "grazed" by Krachts [[KRAHKTS]] and Marsdens. Prominences
and spicules [[SPIK-yools]] arise from this body. Objects on this body follow an 11-year
cycle, experience the Dalton minimum, and have lower temperatures than the surrounding
surface. The chromosphere lies outside the photosphere of this body. The corona is part of,
for the point, what star around which the Earth revolves?

ANSWER: sun (accept Sol)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                          Science Bee 1 - Round 1


(6)     Objects that exceed this quantity emit Cherenkov radiation. Velocity divided by this
quantity equals relativistic beta, which is found in the denominator of the Lorentz factor.
This value is constant in all inertial reference frames according to Einstein's theory of
special relativity. For the point, name this quantity symbolized "c" which is about 300
million meters per second and represents the maximum speed at which objects can travel.

ANSWER: speed of light (accept c before mentioned)

(7)     For humans, the longest wavelength cone primarily sees this color, and cells named
after this color are called erythrocytes. Although they can vary greatly, algal blooms are
sometimes called "tides" of this color. The first stage of a bruise is usually this color and
inflammation can cause skin to turn this color. The iron atom in hemoglobin causes, for the
point, mammalian blood cells to take on what namesake color?

ANSWER: red

(8)     According to legend, this thinker built a robot copy of his daughter Francine after
she died of scarlet fever. Along with Snell, this thinker lends his name to the law of
refraction. This thinker founded analytic geometry by combining algebra with coordinate
planes. This man lends his name to the most common two-dimensional coordinate system.
For the point, name this early modern French philosopher and mathematician, who stated "I
think therefore I am."

ANSWER: René Descartes

(9)    The rank-nullity theorem is used on these objects, and local curvature is described
by the "Hessian" type of these objects. The equation A v equals lambda v describes the
eigenvector and eigenvalue of these objects. Expansion by minors is used to find the
determinant of these objects, which can be used to invert them. For the point, name these
mathematical objects which are arrays of numbers in rows and columns.

ANSWER: matrix (or matrices)

(10) In a pathway in this organelle, cyanide can bind to complex IV [[FOUR]] and lead to
asphyxia. They’re not chloroplasts, but it is believed that these organelles arose from the
endosymbiosis of a prokaryotic cell and aerobic bacteria. People derive these organelles
from egg cells, so DNA passed down through them is maternal. For the point, name this
organelle in which most of the body’s ATP is generated, leading to its nickname, the
“powerhouse of the cell.”

ANSWER: mitochondria (or mitochondrion)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                           Science Bee 1 - Round 1


(11) Because it lacks a differentiated core, this phenomenon on the moon is concentrated
in the crust. Rocks that naturally exhibit this phenomenon are called lodestones. The
geodynamo theory proposes that this phenomenon in the Earth is created by the liquid
outer core, causing compasses to point north. For the point, name this phenomenon which
attracts metals like nickel and iron.

ANSWER: magnetism (accept word forms like magnetic or magnets)

(12) This planet's gravity induces tidal forces that cause volcanism on some of its moons.
This planet is orbited by the largest moon in the Solar System, which is larger than the
planet Mercury. This planet's moons include Callisto, Io [[EYE-oh]], Ganymede, and Europa.
This planet is home to a massive anti-cyclone storm called the Great Red Spot. For the point,
name this largest planet in the Solar System.

ANSWER: Jupiter

(13) Two scientists with this surname learned that compressing quartz leads to an
electric potential, discovering piezoelectricity. Work from those studies was used by a
physicist with this surname to study the properties of uranium in pitchblende. Henri
Becquerel and two people with this surname shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics. For
the point, give the last name of a physicist who won two Nobel Prizes for researching
radioactivity and discovering Radium and Polonium.

ANSWER: Curie (accept Marie Curie, Pierre Curie, Jacques Curie)

(14) When these elements have their electron configuration written out, they are
denoted with their name in brackets. These elements tend to have relatively small atomic
radii due to having high effective nuclear charges. These elements are mostly non-reactive
due to possessing full valence shells of electrons. For the point, name this group of elements
including neon and helium which is located at the rightmost portion of the periodic table.

ANSWER: noble gases (or group 18; or group 8A)

(15) The centimorgan unit maps loci on these structures, consisting of p and q arms.
Crossing over occurs between homologous pairs of these structures. A karyotype can show
the diploid number of these, 46 in humans, as well as the presence of three of number 21 in
a Down syndrome patient. Lining up along the equator during the metaphase of mitosis, for
the point, what are these DNA structures?

ANSWER: chromosomes
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                          Science Bee 1 - Round 1


(16) This structure is above the Moho discontinuity, which separates it from the layer
below. The outer part of the lithosphere is made up of this layer, which comes in oceanic
and continental forms. This structure is generated at mid-ocean ridges and destroyed at
subduction zones and is primarily composed of silica and oxygen. Resting atop the mantle,
for the point, name this outermost layer of the Earth’s surface.

ANSWER: crust

(17) The earliest variety of this technology involved injecting mice or rabbits with the
subject's bodily fluids. Another early example of this technology was based on observing
whether Xenopus [[ZEN-uh-puhs]] frogs ovulated after receiving an injection. This
technology works by measuring human chorionic gonadotropin in a urine sample. For the
point, name these devices which indicate whether a woman is carrying a fetus.

ANSWER: pregnancy tests

(18) When this element is present, a three-to-one ratio is displayed in mass
spectrometry. Aqua regia includes nitric acid and an acid with this anion [[AN-eye-on]].
Stomach acid contains the acid of this element, two atoms of which are found in mustard
gas. The diatomic form of this element is a green gas while another form is used to disinfect
swimming pools. For the point, name this halogen with chemical symbol Cl [[SEE-ELL]].

ANSWER: chlorine (accept Cl before mentioned)

(19) A company that runs one of these software systems named Ecosia claims to be
environmentally friendly and plants trees with its profits. Information will no longer be
displayed by these programs following de-listing. These programs identify potential
matches for queries using web crawling. For the point, name these web programs used to
find information on the internet, the most popular of which are Bing and Google.

ANSWER: search engines

(20) In polar coordinates, the equation "r equals the constant A" produces one of these
shapes. The Cartesian product of two of these shapes gives a torus. This conic section
defines an eccentricity of zero, and a square cannot be constructed with the same area as
this shape with only a compass and straightedge. Pi times the radius squared gives the area
of, for the point, what 2D shape consisting of all points equidistant from a fixed center?

ANSWER: circle

(21) The finding that this particle's constituents contribute almost no spin has led to its
namesake "spin crisis." Some Grand Unified Theories hypothesize that this particle can
decay into a positron and a neutral pion. Cosmic rays consist mostly of these particles,
which are made of two up quarks and one down quark. For the point, name this subatomic
particle with a positive charge.

ANSWER: protons
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                           Science Bee 1 - Round 1


(22) Drugs that treat a disease caused by this virus include enfuvirtide [[en-FYOO-veer-
tide]] and lamivudine [[lah-MIHV-yoo-deen]]. This virus of the Lentivirus genus may
present with Kaposi's sarcoma. X4R5 is a subtype of this virus which can use both CXCR4
and CCR5 receptors to enter the cell. The drug zidovudine [[zai-DOH-vyoo-deen]], or AZT,
reduces activity of the reverse transcriptase of this virus which infects helper T-cells. For
the point, name this retrovirus which causes AIDS.

ANSWER: HIV (or human immunodeficiency virus)

(23) A poem written after one of these events states "one thing at least is certain, light
has weight." That poem was written by Arthur Eddington, who tested the theory of general
relativity during one of these events. Jules Janssen and Norman Lockyer discovered helium
in a spectral line during one of these events. For the point, “solar” and “lunar” are types of
what celestial events in which light from the sun is blocked?

ANSWER: eclipses

(24) This element is extracted from ores by coordination with cyanide. This element
scattered alpha particles in an experiment sometimes named for Geiger and Marsden that
discovered the atomic nucleus. This most malleable metal can be dissolved by aqua regia.
Iron pyrite resembles this element, leading it to be nicknamed “fool’s [this element].” For
the point, name this precious metal with chemical symbol Au.

ANSWER: gold (accept Au before mentioned)

(25) An assumption of this theory is that differential fitness is heritable, and the main
proponent of this theory was influenced by Malthus. Analogous structures are created in the
convergent form of this process, and genetic variation is a pre-requisite for this process to
occur. Theorized to occur via natural selection, for the point, what is this theory about
inherited changes in populations over time which was put forward by Charles Darwin?

ANSWER: theory of evolution

(26) Hyperhidrosis of this organ can be treated with the microwave MiraDry technique.
An early symptom of leprosy is loss of pain sensation in this organ. The urticating hairs of
some caterpillars irritate the eyes as well as this organ. Scabies mites attack the epidermal
layers of this organ in which bacterial infection of sebaceous glands causes acne. The
pigment melanin gives color to, for the point, what exterior human organ which produces
sweat?

ANSWER: skin (accept epidermis before "epidermal" is mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                          Science Bee 1 - Round 1


(27) When these objects form on top of each other, they are known as "pileus." The term
"nimbus" refers to examples of these objects associated with storms. At high altitudes, these
objects are composed of ice crystals and are called "cirrus." Lower level varieties of these
objects include stratus and cumulus. For the point, name these large masses of water vapor
from which rain is released.

ANSWER: clouds

(28) Types of this molecule called “si” and “mi” are used in “interference” experiments. A
type of this molecule can be “charged” with the enzyme aaRS and has a “cloverleaf” shape.
The secondary structure of this molecule can exhibit “wobble," and the “messenger” type of
this molecule contains codons. This uracil-containing molecule is translated into protein by
ribosomes. For the point, name this single-stranded nucleic acid contrasted with DNA.

ANSWER: RNA (or Ribonucleic acid)

(29) Extremely viscous types of this substance can form coulées. Common forms of this
substance include ʻaʻā [[AH-AH]] and pahoehoe [[pah-HOE-ay-HOE-ay]]. When released
underwater, this substance can form its "pillow" variety. Extrusive igneous rocks such as
pumice are formed by the cooling of this substance. Prior to being ejected, this substance is
known as magma. For the point, name this molten rock which is ejected by volcanoes.

ANSWER: lava (do not accept or prompt on "magma")

(30) A semi-empirical formula for this quantity named for Bethe [[BEH-tuh]] and
Weizsäcker [[VAIT-seh-kuh]] can also be used to calculate nuclear binding energy using its
namesake "defect." The Higgs boson gives particles this property, which also equals energy
divided by the speed of light squared according to a formula proposed by Albert Einstein.
For the point, name this quantity symbolized "m" and measured in kilograms.

ANSWER: mass (accept m before mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                            Science Bee 1 - Round 1


Extra Question
(1)     When mixed with asphalt, this material can be made into "blacktop." In large
buildings, this material can be reinforced with steel rebar, and unlike mortar, this material
is primarily used as a building material itself and not as a binding agent. For the point, name
this material composed primarily of rock pieces bound together by cement, which is used to
build roads and sidewalks.

ANSWER: concrete (prompt on "cement" until mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                               Extra Questions



Extra Questions
Extra Tossups
(1)     In 1940, one of these structures in Tacoma, Washington collapsed after high wind
speeds induced resonance. When held up with horizontal supports, these structures are
known as cantilever. The longest and strongest examples of these structures are typically
the suspension type, while early types of these structures were held up with stone arches.
For the point, name these structures used to cross rivers, which include one named Golden
Gate in San Francisco.

ANSWER: bridge (accept suspension bridge or Tacoma Narrows Bridge before
"horizontal")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                          Finals Middle School



Finals Middle School
Finals Tossups
(1)     Skywave propagation involves the reflection of radio waves off this region,
allowing AM broadcasts to travel long distances. Interactions between the
magnetosphere and this region cause the (+) aurora borealis. This region contains the
entire thermosphere and portions of the mesosphere and (*) exosphere. For the point,
name this layer of the atmosphere named for containing a high concentration of charged
particles.

ANSWER: Ionosphere (prompt on "Thermosphere" before mentioned)

(2)     One form of this sense is activated when glutamic [[gloo-TAM-ik]] acid binds to
a "G" protein-coupled receptor. Another form of this sense is activated with the
presence of alkali metals and may have evolved to detect (+) toxins. The lack of this
sense is called hypogeusia [["high"-poh-JYOOS-yah]]. This sense’s receptors are
contained in the papillae [[pah-PIH-lay]], which detect (*) umami [[oo-MAH-mee]],
sweet, and sour. For the point, name this sense detected by the tongue.

ANSWER: Sense of Taste (accept Gustatory sense or Gustatory system)

(3)     On the eastern edges of this “sea” is the Sinus Concordiae [[kon-KOR-dee-ay]],
while the Rupes Cauchy [[ROO-pes koh-SHEE]] crater lies in the northeastern portion
of this sea. A metallic placard was left in this sea including the text (+) “We Came in
Peace for all Mankind.” This sea’s namesake “Base” is the location at which Buzz (*)
Aldrin and his colleagues landed the Eagle module. For the point, name this “Sea” on the
Moon in which American astronauts first landed.

ANSWER: Sea of Tranquility (or Mare Tranquillitatis)

(4)     Climate change is contributing to increasing the size of the active layer of this
substance, increasing instability due to solifluction [[soh-lih-FLUK-shun]].
Collapse-scar bogs and (+) thermokarst lakes form where this substance has broken
down. Palsas and pingos are notable examples of the patterned ground created from
this feature of the tundra. (*) For the point, name this type of soil which remains below 32
degrees Fahrenheit year-round.

ANSWER: Permafrost (prompt on "soil" before mentioned)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                            Finals Middle School


(5)     In computer languages, this property determines how operators with equal
precedence are grouped. When a function has this property, the placement of
parentheses (+) does not impact output. Like commutativity, this property is lacking
for (*) subtraction and division. For the point, name this property of addition and
multiplication, in which the grouping of operations does not change the outcome.

ANSWER: Associative Property (or Associativity)

(6)    One member of this order produces ambergris [[AM-ber-gree]] as a byproduct
of their digestion. Filter-feeding members of this order possess keratin plates called
baleen [[BAY-leen]]. (+) Many members of this order contain a structure called a
melon, which houses the spermaceti [[sper-mah-SEH-tee]] organ used in
echolocation. Members of this order breathe through a specialized (*) nostril on their
backs called a blowhole. For the point, name this order of marine mammals that includes
porpoises, dolphins, and whales.

ANSWER: Cetaceans [[see-TAY-shuns]] (accept Whales before mentioned; prompt on
"dolphin" or "porpoise" before mentioned)

(7)    Thomas Kuhn [[KYOON]] argued that these periods involve paradigm shifts in
a book about The Structure of [this sort of period]. Along with the Renaissance, one of
these periods is held to have not been a radical break from the (+) Middle Ages in the
"continuity thesis." The publication of Copernicus's theories (*) is considered the
beginning of one of, for the point, what type of social era, which included the development of
modern biology and chemistry?

ANSWER: Scientific Revolutions (prompt on "Copernican Revolution")

(8)     For an ideal block and tackle setup, this quantity is equal to the number of
rope sections supporting the block. For a wedge, this quantity is inversely
proportional to the wedge's (+) slope. This quantity is demonstrated by the law of the
lever, which relates opposing weights and (*) arm length. For the point, name this ratio of
output force to input force, used to measure the effectiveness of a simple machine.

ANSWER: Mechanical Advantage

(9)     Chiral [[KY-rull]] symmetry breaking and asymptotic [[AY-simp-TAH-tik]]
freedom are among the properties of the quantum chromodynamics theory of this
force, which confines smaller particles into (+) hadrons. This force, whose magnitude
increases with distance, is mediated by gluons. Binding together neutrons and (*)
protons in the nucleus, for the point, what is this fundamental force which is much more
powerful than the weak force?

ANSWER: Strong Nuclear Force (or Strong Interaction; or Color Force; prompt on
"quantum chromodynamics" before mentioned)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                        Finals Middle School


(10) These phenomena, which can be visualized with a butterfly diagram, were less
frequent during the Spörer and Maunder Minima. The position of these phenomena
predicts the location of (+) coronal loops and solar flares. The frequency of these
phenomena varies on an eleven-year cycle which corresponds to the reversal of a (*)
magnetic field. For the point, name these darker regions found on the surface of the Sun.

ANSWER: Sunspots

(11) This scientist argued that ionic and covalent [[koh-VAY-lent]] bonds existed on
a single continuum. In his book How to Live Longer and Feel Better, this scientist
advocated for taking megadoses of (+) vitamin C to prevent the common cold. This
scientist outlined the modern understanding of an atom's tendency to attract shared
electrons in his book (*) The Nature of the Chemical Bond. For the point, name this
American scientist who won Nobel Prizes in both Peace and Chemistry.

ANSWER: Linus Pauling (or Linus Carl Pauling)

(12) This region's outer boundary is sometimes called the Lehmann-Bullen
discontinuity. Due to having temperatures near the surface of the sun, this region
passes the Curie temperature (+) and is not ferromagnetic. This layer, whose
existence is demonstrated by PKiKP waves, is composed of a solid iron-nickel (*) alloy.
For the point, name this solid metal layer of the Earth, which is surrounded by the liquid
outer core.

ANSWER: Inner Core (prompt on "core"; do not accept or prompt on "outer core")

(13) This scientist, who discovered iron oxide's use as an arsenic antidote,
discovered the elements cesium [[SEE-zee-um]] and rubidium [[roo-BIH-dee-um]]
with Gustav Kirchhoff [[KEER-kof]]. This scientist lends his name to a device (+) that
manipulates airflow at the top and fuel supply at the bottom to control (*) combustion
rate. For the point, name this German chemist, who lends his name to a common type of
open-flame burner used in lab experiments.

ANSWER: Robert Bunsen (or Robert Wilhelm Eberhard Bunsen; accept Bunsen Burner)

(14) For an object to be in static equilibrium, this force's metacenter must be above
the center of gravity. This force, which equals density times gravity times volume, is
opposed by the (+) hydrostatic pressure gradient. This force equals the weight of the
fluid that is displaced according to the Archimedes (*) principle. For the point, identify
this force that allows objects to float in a liquid.

ANSWER: Buoyant force (or Buoyancy; accept Upthrust)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                         Finals Middle School


(15) In his De Architectura, Vitruvius [[vih-TROO-vee-us]] said that these devices
were invented by Anaximander [[ah-naks-ih-MAN-der]]. In their simplest form, these
devices possess a vertical portion, the gnomon [[NOH-mon]], and a horizontal (+)
portion, the style. Along with specialized candles and water drip clocks, these were
among the earliest devices to (*) mark the time of day. For the point, name these devices
that determine the time from the position of a shadow.

ANSWER: Sundial

(16) Large circular holes in these objects are called moulins [[MOO-lins]], which
can drain lakes named for these objects. Deposits created by these objects include
eskers and (+) drumlins. Fjords, cirques [[SIRKS]], and moraines were created by the
retreat of these objects which break down at the coast via calving [[KAV-ing]], forming
(*) icebergs. For the point, name these massive ice flows that cover Greenland and
Antarctica.

ANSWER: Glaciers (prompt on "glacial lake")

(17) In marsupials, this structure's function is fulfilled by the anterior commissure.
Patients who fail to develop this structure may develop Probst bundles to
compensate. Damage to this structure can result in alien hand syndrome or Dr.
Strangelove (+) syndrome. This structure has a Latin name meaning "tough body."
This structure is severed in patients who undergo a split (*) brain procedure, which is
sometimes used to treat epilepsy. For the point, name this structure that links the two
hemispheres of the brain.

ANSWER: Corpus Callosum (or Callosal Commissure)

(18) These objects are known as "potato stones" when recovered from England's
Mendip Hills. These objects can form when an empty cavity, such as a gas bubble, is
filled with groundwater that deposits (+) crystalline minerals. These objects are
smaller analogs to vugs and (*) crystal caves. For the point, name these hollow rocks
containing crystals, whose name comes from the Greek for "Earth-like."

ANSWER: Geode

(19) A type of scattering found in these substances can give a blue appearance to
motorcycle smoke or flour mixed into water. These substances, which exhibit the
Tyndall effect, include (+) emulsions and aerosols. Common examples of these
substances include milk, fog, and (*) foam. For the point, identify this type of substance,
in which small particles of one substance are suspended within another.

ANSWER: Colloid (accept Colloidal Suspension; prompt on "suspension")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                            Finals Middle School


(20) In the most widely accepted hypothesis, this phylum is considered the sister
taxon to bilateria [["by"-lah-TEE-ree-ah]]. One sessile [[SESS-ile]] clade [[KLAYD]] in
this phylum has a symbiotic relationship with clownfish, providing (+) shelter in
exchange for cleaning. This phylum is characterized by a specialized type of cell that
releases stinging (*) toxins on contact. For the point, name this animal phylum that
includes sea anemones, corals, and jellyfish.

ANSWER: Cnidarians [["nigh"-"DARE"-ee-uns]] (prompt on "Jellies"; be lenient on
pronunciation)

(21) A sensitive magnetometer [[mag-neh-TAH-mee-ter]] called a SQUID
[["SQUID"]] consists of two of these materials separated by a thin layer. A loop
example of these materials is called a Josephson junction. Through the Meissner (+)
effect, these materials expel magnetic field lines. The BCS theory of these materials
posits that phonons mediate the binding of electrons into Cooper (*) pairs. For the
point, name these materials which have no electrical resistance.

ANSWER: Superconductor (accept Superconductivity; prompt on "conductor")

(22) When oxygen is present in its substrate, this protein produces
phosphoglycolate [[foss-foh-gly-KOH-"late"]] and 3-phosphoglycerate [["three"
foss-foh-GLIH-seh-"rate"]]. In C4 plants, this protein has reduced specificity and is
located in the bundle (+) sheath cells. This protein is the most abundant enzyme on
Earth and catalyzes the start of the Calvin (*) cycle. For the point, name this major
enzyme important for the carboxylation of RuBP in photosynthesis.

ANSWER: RuBisCO [[roo-BIH-skoh]] (or RuBPCase; or RuBPco; accept
Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase)

(23) For heat and moisture-sensitive materials, ethylene oxide gas can be used to
perform this task by inhibiting metabolism. An autoclave uses "wet-heat" to leverage
hydrolysis [["high"-DRAH-lih-siss]] (+) to perform this task on glassware, rendering it
aseptic. 70 percent is the most effective concentration of isopropyl
[["eye"-soh-PROH-pil]] (*) alcohol for performing this task. For the point, identify this task
of killing microorganisms on lab equipment and other surfaces.

ANSWER: Sterilization (accept word forms and answers such as "making sterile; accept
answers indicating "killing microorganism" before mentioned; prompt on answers such as
"cleaning")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                          Finals Middle School


(24) Abnormalities in the millisecond variety of these objects provide indirect
evidence of gravitational waves. When originally discovered, these objects were
nicknamed "LGM," or little (+) green men. These bodies are only detectable if one of
their poles points toward the (*) Earth. For the point, name these rapidly rotating neutron
stars that are named for periodically emitting bursts of radio waves.

ANSWER: Pulsar (accept Pulsating Radio Source; prompt on "Little Green Men" or "LGM"
before mentioned; prompt on "Neutron Star" before mentioned)

(25) Range contraction can cause the centrifugal [[sen-TRIH-foo-gul]] type of this
process. The Theory of Punctuated Equilibrium posits that this process occurs in
rapid bursts. When this process occurs over a single geographic range, it is termed
"sympatric." Geographic (+) isolation causes the allopatric type of this process to
occur, and new branches on phylogenetic [[FY-loh-"genetic"]] trees are formed by this
(*) process. For the point, name this process which results in two populations being unable
to breed with one another.

ANSWER: Speciation (accept Centrifugal Speciation; accept Sympatric Speciation; accept
Allopatric Speciation; accept Peripatric Speciation; accept Parapatric Speciation; prompt
on "Evolution")

(26) The centripetal [[sen-TRIH-peh-tal]] form of this quantity is always directed
inward. Torque is equal to the moment of inertia multiplied by the tangential form of
this quantity. In general relativity, it is (+) impossible to distinguish between forces
caused by gravity and this (*) quantity. For the point, name this quantity measuring rate of
change in velocity, which can have units of meters per second squared.

ANSWER: Acceleration (accept Centripetal acceleration; accept Tangential acceleration)

(27) A statistically determinate type of these objects will bend uniformly when a
uniform weight is applied. The cantilevered type of these objects are supported only
from one end. One common type of these objects has two (+) horizontal flanges
[[FLAN-jeez]] connected by a vertical web, known as the "I" type (*) of these objects. For
the point, name these fundamental structural components, which have much greater lengths
than widths.

ANSWER: Beam (accept Cantilevered beam; accept I-beam)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                         Finals Middle School


(28) Highly inefficient algorithms for this task are given the prefix "bogo." One
algorithm for this task that uses paired comparisons is named after garden gnomes.
Exchange-based algorithms for this task have a (+) worst-case runtime of "Big O
[[OH]] of n squared." Common algorithms for this task include ones named bubble,
quick, and (*) merge. For the point, name this task of organizing an array or list into the
desired order.

ANSWER: Sorting (or Sorting algorithm; accept Bogo, Gnome, Exchange, Bubble, Quick, or
Merge Sort)

(29) Cylinders have a value of zero, and spheres have a negative value for this man's
namesake curvature. This man's proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra was
created to refute D'Alembert's [[dah-lem-BEHRS]] false proof. This man names a (+)
theorem relating the electric field to the charge distribution, and this man also names
a distribution shaped like a bell (*) curve. For the point, name this German
mathematician who names the normal distribution.

ANSWER: Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss (accept Gaussian curve or curvature; accept Gauss's
law or flux theorem; accept Gaussian distribution or Gauss's distribution; accept
Laplace-Gauss distribution)

(30) This constellation names the closest known moving group to Earth, being part
of the Local Bubble. This constellation contains a notable binary system made of
Mizar [["MY"-zar]] and Alcor. Major stars in this constellation include (+) Dubhe
[[DOO-beh]] and Merak [[MEE-rak]], which can be used to locate Polaris (*) in another
constellation. For the point, name this northern hemisphere constellation that contains the
Big Dipper.

ANSWER: Ursa Major (or Great Bear; accept Ursa Major Moving Group or Ursa Major
Association; prompt on the "Big Dipper" before read; prompt on "the Plough")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals - 2021-05-29                       Finals Middle School


Extra Questions
(1)     The close resemblance of one type of cell in this phylum to choanoflagellates
[[koh-an-oh-FLAH-jeh-lets]] may imply a close evolutionary relationship. Along with
placozoa [[play-koh-ZOH-ah]], this is the only animal phylum to lack true,
differentiated (+) tissues. This phylum is usually considered to be the most basal
animal lineage, making it the sister taxon to (*) all other animals. For the point, name
this simple animal phylum, which contains sponges.

ANSWER: Porifera (prompt on "sponges" before mentioned)

(2)    Due to this phenomenon, changes in wind velocity can cause a hook echo on
weather radar. This phenomenon's namesake radar is used by police (+) radar guns
to determine a car's velocity. This phenomenon is visualized with the bunching of
waves in front of a moving source. (*) Redshift is caused by, for the point, what
phenomenon in which a pitch shifts with movement, as with a siren driving by?

ANSWER: Doppler effect (or Doppler shift; accept Doppler radar; prompt on "red shift" or
"blue shift" before mentioned)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                           Extra Questions



Extra Questions
Extra Questions
(1)     Short-period types of these objects originate from the Kuiper [[kye-PER]] belt,
whereas long period varieties come from the Oort Cloud. In 1994, one of these objects
named (+) Shoemaker-Levy 9 crashed into the surface of Jupiter. Solar wind causes
the tails (*) of these objects to always point away from the star which they orbit. For the
point, name these icy bodies that orbit the Sun and include examples named Halley's and
Hale-Bopp.

ANSWER: Comets (accept Short-period comets; accept Long-period comets; accept
Periodic comets)

(2)    As a consequence of its high density, this body's atmosphere experiences
super-rotation. Unique volcanic features on this body's surface include pancake
domes and ticks. This body is the only (+) planet to experience retrograde rotation.
Due to its similar size, this body is sometimes called (*) "Earth's twin." For the point,
name this planet with the hottest surface in the Solar System, the second planet from the
Sun.

ANSWER: Venus

(3)     In 1961, Bernice Eddy discovered that millions of people were exposed to SV40
[[S-V-"forty"]] through contaminated vaccines for this disease. During the Cutter
incident, thousands of Americans were given (+) faulty live-virus vaccines for this
disease. This disease's first vaccine was invented by Jonas (*) Salk in the 1950s. For the
point, name this disease that attacks the nervous system and which can cause paralysis.

ANSWER: Polio (or Poliomyelitis)

(4)    Historically, females diagnosed with Rett syndrome were considered to have a
variety of this disorder. Children with this disorder typically fail the Sally-Anne test,
(+) demonstrating a lack of theory of mind. The DSM Five reclassified this disorder as
a spectrum, (*) subsuming the previous diagnosis of Asperger's syndrome. For the point,
name this neurodevelopmental condition characterized by low social interest and
communication struggles.

ANSWER: Autism (or Autism Spectrum Disorder; accept ASD; accept answers relating to
being Autistic; prompt on "on the spectrum" and similar answers)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                          Extra Questions


(5)    The Bordes [[BOR-dess]]–Binford debate centered on the existence of
ethnicities among this species. Ralph Solecki controversially claimed that the
presence of flower pollen with a buried member of this species was evidence of (+)
ritual burial. This species is believed to have frequently interbred with the closely
related Denisovans [[deh-NEE-soh-vins]]. The 1983 discovery of this species's hyoid
bone suggests they had the (*) ability to talk. For the point, name this close relative of
modern humans, whose remains were first discovered in a namesake German valley.

ANSWER: Neanderthals (or Homo Neanderthalis; accept pronunciations which replace
the "TH" with a "T" sound; prompt on "Neander Valley")

(6)     The vaccinia [[vak-SIH-nee-ah]] virus is used to inoculate against this disease
and was first harvested from sores on the hands of milkmaids. During a 1763 siege,
British and American soldiers (+) used this disease as a bioweapon by distributing
contaminated blankets. The world's first vaccines were produced by Edward (*)
Jenner to prevent this disease. For the point, name this deadly disease caused by Variola
viruses, which was eradicated in the 1970s.

ANSWER: Smallpox (prompt on "Variola Major" or "Variola Minor" before mentioned)

(7)     This compound can be artificially synthesized using dimethylurea
[["die"-meh-thil-yoo-REE-ah]] and malonic [[mah-LAH-nik]] acid. This compound's
primary metabolites are paraxanthine [["pair"-ah-ZAN-theen]] and theobromine
[[thee-oh-BROH-meen]]. With theophylline [[thee-AH-fih-leen]], this compound is
often used as a treatment for (+) sleep apnea among premature babies. This
stimulant is often extracted using supercritical carbon dioxide. Due to being an
adenosine [[ah-DEH-noh-seen]] antagonist, this alkaloid compound is commonly used
to prevent (*) drowsiness. For the point, name this stimulant found in tea and coffee.

ANSWER: Caffeine (accept Guaranine; accept Methyltheobromine)

(8)    This compound is industrially produced in the anthra-quinone
[[an-thrah-KWIH-nohn]] process. A solution of ferrous iron and this compound is
used to treat drinking water as Fenton's reagent. Within eukaryotic
[[yoo-"care"-ee-AH-tik]] cells, specialized (+) vacuoles use catalase [[KAT-ah-"lace"]]
to break down this compound into water and (*) oxygen. For the point, name this
compound with formula H2O2 which, like isopropyl alcohol, is commonly used as a first aid
antiseptic.

ANSWER: Hydrogen Peroxide (accept H2O2 before mentioned; prompt on "peroxide")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                            Extra Questions


(9)    Along with zinc and copper, this element can be extracted with the Albion
[[AL-bee-un]] process. Common ores of this element include nagyágite
[[nahg-YAH-gite]], petzite and krennerite, from which this element can be extracted
through (+) cyanide leaching. Iron pyrite superficially resembles this element,
lending it the nickname (*) "fool's" this element. For the point, name this highly
conductive precious metal known for its yellow color.

ANSWER: Gold (accept Au)

(10) These biomes are the predominant environment in which the European
chamois [[sham-WAH]] goat-antelope is found. The pika [["PIE"-kah]] is a close rabbit
relative found in these biomes. Guanacos [[gwah-NAH-kohs]] and vicuñas
[[vih-KOO-nyahs]] (+) are two South American camelids [[KAM-eh-lids]] noted for
living in these biomes. Plant-life on these biomes typically stops (*) above the snow
line. For the point, name these high-altitude biomes found in places such as the Himalayas.

ANSWER: Mountains (accept Alpine; accept Mountain range; accept Highlands; accept
Himalayan Mountains)

(11) This thinker was the first to note the color-changing camouflage of octopuses
in his book History of Animals. In On the Heavenly Spheres, this thinker claimed that
the stars were (+) suspended in an imperishable aether [[AY-ther]]. This thinker
posited the prime mover in his (*) Physics. For the point, name this Greek philosopher
who wrote the Nichomachean [[nih-koh-mah-KEE-an]] Ethics and tutored Alexander the
Great.

ANSWER: Aristotle (or Aristoteles)

(12) Several patients with aphakia [[ah-FAY-kee-ah]] have claimed to be able to
perceive this kind of radiation. This type of radiation creates free radicals by reacting
with CFCs, which can damage the ozone layer. This kind of radiation creates (+)
vitamin D from ergosterol [[er-GAH-steh-rol]] and 7-dehydrocholesterol
[[dee-hy-dro-"cholesterol"]]. The primary cause of (*) sunburns, for the point, what is
this type of electromagnetic radiation which has wavelengths longer than x-rays, but shorter
than visible light?

ANSWER: Ultraviolet Radiation (or UV Radiation; prompt on "radiation")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                          Extra Questions


(13) One technology using this type of radiation was invented by Manne Siegbahn
[[MAH-neh SEEG-bahn]]. A type of crystallography using this radiation was used by
Rosalind Franklin to take a (+) photo of the structure of DNA. The discovery of this
type of radiation earned Wilhelm Röntgen [[RENT-gen]] (*) a Nobel Prize in Physics. For
the point, name this type of radiation with a lower frequency than gamma rays, which can
be used to image bones.

ANSWER: X-rays (or X-Radiation; accept Röntgen Radiation before "Röntgen")

(14) In a wheel and axle system with equal wheel and axle mass, this quantity for
the wheel is equal to mass times radius squared. For a belt and pulley system, this
quantity is equal to the (+) axial force on the belt multiplied by the radius of the drive
pulley. This quantity, symbolized tau, is the time derivative of angular (*) momentum.
For the point, name this rotational analogue of linear force.

ANSWER: Torque (accept Moment, Moment of force, Rotational force, or Turning effect)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                      Round 1 Middle School



Round 1 Middle School
Round 1 Tossups
(1)      For a perfect black body, this quantity equals sigma times area times temperature
raised to the fourth power according to the Stefan-Boltzmann equation. The maximum value
for this quantity is proportional to stellar mass due to the Eddington limit. This quantity is
the vertical axis of the HR diagram, plotting it against color. For the point, name this
measure of the total amount of light emitted by a star.

ANSWER: Luminosity (accept Absolute Magnitude; prompt on "magnitude")

(2)     When subjected to nonzero values of this quantity, piezoelectric
[[pee-EH-zoh-"electric"]] materials experience electric polarization and release electricity.
When forces are applied parallel to the plane of the cross-sectional area, this quantity's
sheer form arises. When this quantity exceeds the strength factor, permanent deformations
can occur. For the point, name this measure of internal forces, which can lead to strain.

ANSWER: Stress

(3)     Some members of this phylum possess teeth-like plate structures known as
Aristotle’s Lanterns. The Holothuroidea [[hah-luh-thoo-ROY-dee-ah]] class in this phylum
feeds by vomiting out its digestive organs and pulling them back in. Adults in this phylum
typically possess penta-radial symmetry and use pressurized water for locomotion. For the
point, name this animal phylum that includes sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and starfish.

ANSWER: Echinodermata (or Echinoderms)

(4)    When orbiting a larger body, these objects can undergo destructive carbon
detonations. These objects, the most common stellar endpoint, are found in the lower-left
corner of an HR diagram. These stars are supported from collapse by the degeneracy
pressure of their fast-moving electrons. For the point, name these small stellar remnants,
which are not massive enough to become a neutron star.

ANSWER: White dwarfs (accept Degenerate dwarf; prompt on "dwarf" or "star")

(5)     On the moon, this region possesses the body's magnetic field, making it irregular.
Subduction zones occur when parts of this region are forced below the Moho Discontinuity,
melting and becoming part of a lower layer. This layer, which moves along the
asthenosphere [[as-THEH-noh-"sphere"]], is divided into several tectonic plates. For the
point, name this outermost layer of the Earth, which sits on top of the mantle.

ANSWER: Crust (prompt on "lithosphere")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 1 Middle School


(6)     This scientist names inhibitory cells within the brain which are classified as Type
One or Two based on their axon length. A staining method named for this scientist that uses
silver chromate led to the discovery that brain tissue consists of individual neurons. An
organelle named for this scientist passes vesicles [[VEH-sih-kuls]] through folds called
cisternae [[sis-TER-nay]]. For the point, name this Italian biologist whose namesake
"apparatus" packages proteins within the cell.

ANSWER: Camillo Golgi [[GOHL-jee]] (accept Golgi apparatus; accept Golgi complex; accept
Golgi body; accept Golgi stain)

(7)     Elephant fish often present relatively larger than normal examples of this structure.
This structure's cortex is home to namesake granule [[GRAN-yool]] cells, the most common
type of neuron in the brain. This structure contains a set of GABAergic [[gah-bah-EHR-jik]]
inhibitory neurons called the Purkinje [[per-KIN-jee]] cells. This structure, which sits behind
the pons, regulates motor control and balance. For the point, name this region of the lower
brain, the name of which comes from the Latin for "little brain."

ANSWER: Cerebellum (prompt on "hindbrain"; prompt on "little brain" or "brain" before
mentioned; do not accept or prompt on "cerebrum")

(8)     Felsic varieties of this substance can form namesake "domes." When this substance
is extruded underwater, it can form its "pillow" variety. This substance can be classified as
either ʻaʻā [[AH-AH]] or pahoehoe [[pah-HOY-HOY]] based on its texture and makeup.
Pumice [[PUM-iss]] and obsidian are examples of igneous rocks formed by the cooling of
this substance. For the point, name this form of molten rock created when magma reaches
the Earth's surface.

ANSWER: Lava (do not accept or prompt on "magma")

(9)    These particles, which are said to have "left-handed" chirality [[kai-RAH-lih-tee]],
were discovered to have mass by Takaaki Kajita [[tah-kah-AH-kee kah-JEE-tah]]. Beta-plus
decay releases a positron, a neutron, and one of these one-half spin particles. These particles
come in three flavors corresponding to electrons, muons [[MYOO-ons]], and tauons,
between which they oscillate. For the point, name these neutrally charged leptons, which are
nearly massless.

ANSWER: Neutrinos (accept Tau neutrinos; accept Muon neutrinos; accept Electron
neutrinos; prompt on "fermions"; do not accept or prompt on "neutrons")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                      Round 1 Middle School


(10) An autoimmune disease impacting this organ is the most common cause of
pernicious anemia. This organ's intrinsic factor is required to absorb vitamin B12. Infections
with H. pylori bacteria and misuse of NSAID [[EN-sed]] painkillers are the most common
causes of ulcers in this organ. This organ releases chyme [[KIME]] into the duodenum
[[doo-AH-deh-num]] of the small intestine. For the point, name this organ that digests food
with its namesake acid.

ANSWER: Stomach (accept Stomach acid)

(11) A high-pressure solvent is forced through a bed of tightly packed adsorbing material
in this technique's high-performance variety. This technique, which has a thin layer variety,
uses a mobile and stationary phase and can be demonstrated with a coffee filter and marker.
For the point, name this lab technique used to separate mixtures using namesake paper,
which forms colorful bands.

ANSWER: Chromatography (accept High-performance or High pressure liquid
chromatography; accept Thin-layer chromatography; accept Paper chromatography)

(12) When these structures are unable to become ionized, they become the reflection
type instead of the emission type. The planetary variety of these structures occur when a
red giant expels its outer layers. The Pillars of Creation are a formation within one of these
structures named Eagle. The Crab is a well-known example of, for the point, what large
star-forming clouds of dust and gas?

ANSWER: Nebulae (or Nebulasl accept Reflection nebula; accept Emission nebula; accept
Planetary nebula; accept Eagle nebula; accept Crab [a]nebula)

(13) This force causes objects to become charged in the tribo-electric effect. Amonton’s
[[ah-mohn-TOHNS]] Law states that this force is independent of surface area. This force is
described by a namesake coefficient, represented with the letter mu [[MYOO]], and comes in
dynamic and kinetic varieties. Causing your hands to warm up when you rub them together,
for the point, what is this force which resists an object’s motion?

ANSWER: Friction (accept Dynamic friction, Static friction, or Sliding friction; accept
Kinetic friction; accept Coefficient of friction)

(14) The WRB and UK-ADAS [[u-k-AY-duss]] systems classify this substance on a
triangular diagram. This substance naturally sorts into distinguishable layers known as
"horizons." Loam [["LOW"-um]] is a type of this substance particularly valuable for
agriculture, and this substance can be enriched with humus [[HYOO-muss]]. This substance
is composed of organic matter, sand, silt, and clay. For the point, identify this substance in
which seeds are planted.

ANSWER: Soil (accept Dirt; accept Earth)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                      Round 1 Middle School


(15) One variety of these organisms can leave behind hardened scars known as their
namesake "boot." Gilded flickers form nests inside these organisms. Carmine dyes are made
from a type of beetle that lives on these organisms, one species of which, Peyote
[[peh-YOH-teh]], contains the hallucinogen mescaline [[MEH-skah-lin]]. Other examples of
these plants include pincushion and saguaro varieties. For the point, name these desert
plants that are covered in spines.

ANSWER: Cactus (or Cacti; or Cactuses; accept Cactaceae; accept Saguaro cactus; accept
Pincushion cactus; accept Peyote cactus)

(16) One of these devices named for Clarence Zener allows for reverse flow below the
breakdown voltage. A triangle whose point leads into a line is the standard circuit notation
for these devices. The simplest kind of these devices is a single p-n junction. For the point,
name these devices that only allow current flow in a single direction, which include a
notable "light-emitting" variety.

ANSWER: Diode (accept Light-Emitting Diode; accept Zener diode; accept P-N diode;
prompt on "LED")

(17) A function named for this man gives the number of integers less than a given integer,
his totient [["TOE"-shent]] function. With Mascheroni [[mah-skeh-ROH-nee]], this man
names a constant symbolized with a lowercase gamma. This man's namesake number is
defined as the limit of "one plus one over n all to the nth power" as n approaches infinity,
roughly equal to 2.718. For the point, name this Swiss mathematician whose namesake
number is the base of the natural logarithm.

ANSWER: Leonhard Euler [[OY-lehr]] (accept Euler's totient function or Euler's phi
function; accept Euler–Mascheroni constant or Euler's constant; accept Euler's number;
prompt on "e")

(18) This compound, which is the reduced form of carbon dioxide, could trigger a
runaway feedback loop according to the "gun hypothesis." This greenhouse gas is commonly
trapped inside ice clathrates [[KLATH-"rates"]] at the bottom of the ocean. This compound is
the primary fuel found in natural gas. For the point, name this simplest hydrocarbon, a
tetrahedral compound with chemical formula CH4.

ANSWER: Methane (accept CH4 before mentioned)

(19) These particles are theorized to have a half-life of 1.67 times 10 to the 34th years
and would decay into a neutral pion [["PIE"-on]] and a positron. These particles can capture
an electron through inverse beta decay. These particles make up the nucleus of the protium
isotope of hydrogen. For the point, name this positively charged baryon [[BAY-ree-on]],
which forms the nucleus with neutrons.

ANSWER: Proton
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                        Round 1 Middle School


(20) The largest known variety of these animals is the raja ofu [[rah-jah-OH-foo]]. Some
varieties of these animals from the Anthophila [[an-thoh-FEE-lah]] clade [[KLADE]] are able
to communicate distance information through a "waggle dance." Neonicotinoid
[[nee-oh-nih-KAH-tih-noyd]] pesticides are considered the most common cause of colony
collapse disorder among these animals. The "Africanized" hybrid type of these animals are
often known as the "killer" variety. For the point, name these insects that live in colonies and
produce wax and honey.

ANSWER: Bees (accept Honeybees; accept Africanized honeybees; accept Killer bees;
accept Wallace's giant bee; do not accept or prompt on "wasps")

(21) This element was first isolated by Hennig Brand, who boiled down gallons of his
own urine. This element names a type of photoluminescence often contrasted with
fluorescence. This element's allotropes include a tetrahedral white variety and an
amorphous red variety. The primary ingredient in match heads, for the point, what is this
element which is located below nitrogen on the periodic table, with atomic number 15 and
symbol "P"?

ANSWER: Phosphorus (accept P before mentioned; accept White phosphorus or
Tetraphosphorus; accept Red phosphorus)

(22) The formation of this material lends its name to the Carboniferous
[[kar-boh-NIH-fer-us]] period, during which it was deposited in namesake seams and beds.
This material is made from the deposition and compression of ancient plant matter, which
eventually solidifies to become peat and this material. Varieties of this material include
lignite, anthracite, and the bituminous variety. For the point, name this solid fossil fuel.

ANSWER: Coal (accept Black coal; accept Bituminous coal before mentioned; accept
Lignite or Anthracite before mentioned)

(23) This field's structure is equivalent to the non-empty set A. This field takes its name
from the Arabic for the "reunion of broken parts" or "bone-setting." According to the
fundamental theorem of this field, at least one complex root can be found for every
non-constant single-variable polynomial with complex coefficients. For the point, name this
field of mathematics used to solve for unknown variables.

ANSWER: Algebra (or al-Jabr; accept Fundamental Theorem of Algebra)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                     Round 1 Middle School


(24) A child with the Lennox-Gastaut [[gah-STOH]] variety of this condition is described
in Anne Fadiman's [[FAD-ih-mans]] book The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down. This
condition can be treated with phenytoin [[feh-neh-TOH-in]] or phenobarbital
[[fee-noh-BAR-bih-tahl]]. Severe, hemisphere-isolated types of this condition can be treated
with a split-brain procedure. Episodes of this condition can be induced by slashing strobe
lights. For the point, name this neurological disorder, the most common cause of seizures.

ANSWER: Epilepsy (accept Epileptic seizure(s); prompt on "seizures" before mentioned)

(25) This compound is oxidized by heating it with oxygen to form nitric oxide in the first
step of the Ostwald process. Mixing this compound with bleach-containing substances
produces toxic chloramine [[KLOH-rah-meen]] vapors. An artificial nitrogen fixation process
for manufacturing this compound was discovered by Fritz Haber [[HAH-buh]]. For the point,
name this simplest amine [[AM-een]] compound, whose chemical formula is NH3.

ANSWER: Ammonia (accept NH3 before mentioned; do not accept or prompt on
"Ammonium")

(26) With Maurice Koechlin [[KEH-klin]], this engineer built the Garabit [[gah-rah-BEE]]
Viaduct. This engineer designed the interior supports for the Statue of Liberty. One of this
engineer's projects, which at the time was the world's tallest manmade structure, relied on
an exponential shape and latticework to withstand high wind speeds. For the point, name
this French civil engineer, who names a triangular tower in Paris.

ANSWER: Gustave Eiffel (or Alexandre Gustave Eiffel; or Bönickhausen dit Eiffel; accept
Eiffel Tower or Tour Eiffel)

(27) At the time of its launch, the Unity Engine was exclusively used for making these
programs on macOS [[MAK-O-S]]. BlueMaxima's Flashpoint is a project dedicated to saving
these programs made on Adobe Flash. One of the most popular frameworks for making 3D
types of these programs is the Unreal Engine owned by Epic. For the point, name these
computer entertainment programs, early examples of which include Pong and Pac-Man.

ANSWER: Video Games (accept Computer Games; prompt on "Game(s)")

(28) This organ is made up of several hexagonal lobules [[LOB-yools]], which consist of
this organ’s namesake cells arranged around a central vein. In the Cori cycle, lactose is
moved into this organ where it is converted into glucose. Cirrhosis [[sih-ROH-siss]] of this
organ can cause jaundice, or the yellowing of skin, often resulting from long-term alcohol
abuse. For the point, name this large abdominal organ which removes toxins from the blood
and produces bile.

ANSWER: Liver (accept Liver cells)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                        Round 1 Middle School


(29) This is the largest body to have its existence predicted by the now-discredited
Titius-Bode [[TIH-tee-uss-BOHD]] Law. When he discovered this planet, William Herschel
proposed the name "George's Star." The moons of this planet are named for Alexander Pope
and William Shakespeare characters, including Titania and Miranda. This planet's axis of
rotation sits at a 90-degree angle relative to its orbit. For the point, name this seventh planet
from the Sun.

ANSWER: Uranus

(30) During World War One, this scientist developed mobile radiography units to quickly
X-ray wounded soldiers. This scientist unsuccessfully attempted to sell her gold Nobel Prize
medals to the French National Bank to help the war effort. This woman died of aplastic
[[AY-"plastic"]] anemia, obtained as a result of prolonged exposure to her work with
radiation. For the point, name this woman, the first person to win two Nobel Prizes in two
different scientific fields: Chemistry and Physics.

ANSWER: Marie Curie (or Marie Salomea Skłodowska Curie; or Maria Salomea
Skłodowska; accept Madame Curie)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                      Round 1 Middle School


Extra Question
(1)     The olm is a salamander species that is the only European vertebrate to exclusively
live in these habitats. Unlike many insects living in these habitats, Leptodirus
[[lep-toh-"DIE"-russ]] beetles retain their bright colors. Species that live in these habitats
are referred to as troglobites. For the point, name these habitats inhabited by many
depigmented and blind species, which are also a popular roosting spot for bats.

ANSWER: Cave (or Caverns)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals - Middle School                                 Semifinals



Semifinals - Middle School
Round 4 Tossups
(1)    The closest one of these objects to Earth is the Luhman-16 system, which is
also where the iron rain of these objects was first observed. (+) Rafael Rebolo
[[reh-BOH-loh]] pioneered the lithium test for identifying these bodies, which do not
undergo sustained hydrogen (*) fusion. For the point, name these cool, very low
luminosity stellar objects, commonly called failed stars.

ANSWER: Brown dwarfs (prompt on "star(s)")

(2)     By firing a gun into the ballistic variety of these devices, the momentum of a
bullet can be found. A classical example of a chaotic system is the double (+) variety of
these devices. The ideal form of these devices consists of a weighted bob at the end of
a massless rod. (*) For the point, name these devices that swing to keep time in
grandfather clocks.

ANSWER: Pendulums (accept Double pendulum)

(3)    This many carbon atoms are found in the simplest antiaromatic molecule,
cyclobutadiene [["sigh"-kloh-byoo-tah-"DIE"-een]]. Steroids such as cholesterol (+)
contain this many fused rings, which is also the number of bonds to the central atom
in molecules with see-saw and square planar geometries. (*) For the point, give this
number of hydrogen atoms found in methane, the simplest tetrahedral alkane.

ANSWER: Four

(4)    The number of turns in these devices divided by length is directly proportional
to their magnetic flux density. These devices are typically constructed out of an
insulated (+) wire coil and store energy in the magnetic field when passing an electric
current through it. (*) For the point, name these circuit components whose namesake
quantity is measured in Henrys.

ANSWER: Inductors (accept Coil, Choke, or Reactor)

(5)    The influence of this quantity causes the integrated Sachs-Wolfe effect. The
existence of an increasing variety of this quantity, known as its phantom (+) type,
would cause the "big rip" end of the universe. Driving the expansion of the (*)
universe, for the point, what is this unobserved quantity that makes up the bulk of the
universe's mass-energy, more than twice as prevalent as dark matter.

ANSWER: Dark energy (do not accept or prompt on "dark matter")
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals - Middle School                                 Semifinals


(6)     Faraday's constant equals the charge of an electron times this quantity, which
is also multiplied by Boltzmann's constant to give the ideal gas (+) constant. This
constant equals the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon-12, which is
approximately 6.022 times 10 to the 23rd (*) power. For the point, name this constant
that defines the number of particles in a mole, named for an Italian scientist.

ANSWER: Avogadro's number (or Avogadro's constant)

(7)    Common systems of a disorder caused by this hormone include crowded teeth
and enlarged hands and feet. Excessive levels of this hormone can cause (+) pituitary
tumors and acromegaly [[ak-roh-MEH-gah-lee]]. Deficiencies of this hormone are the
primary cause of human dwarfism. (*) For the point, name this common
performance-enhancing drug, a peptide hormone responsible for stimulating cell division.

ANSWER: Human Growth Hormone (or HGH; accept Somatropin or Somatotropin)

(8)     This rock, the intrusive counterpart of rhyolite, is the most common material
found in Bornhardts. This rock forms its namesake domes at landmarks such as (+)
Sugarloaf Mountain and Yosemite's Half Dome. This rock contains crystals of feldspar
and quartz and predominantly makes up the continental crust. (*) For the point, name
this coarse grained igneous rock commonly used to make high end countertops.

ANSWER: Granite

(9)    Along with ambient visible light, this is the primary radiation converted into
electrons in night vision goggles. This radiation names a form of (+) spectroscopy that
measures a molecule's vibrational transition. This radiation has wavelengths from
700 millimeters to 1 centimeter. (*) For the point, name this radiation range with
wavelengths longer than that of visible light.

ANSWER: Infrared light (or IR)

(10) This scientist's paper "Experiments on Plant Hybridization" led to the
introduction of the laws of segregation and (+) independent assortment. This
scientist's studies of Pisum sativum [[PEE-sum sah-TEE-vum]] led him to coin the
terms "dominant" and "recessive." (*) For the point, name this 19th-century friar who
studied inheritance among pea plants.

ANSWER: Gregor Johann Mendel
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals - Middle School                                   Semifinals


(11) Common causes of these events, the largest of which occurred in Washington
in 1980, include increases in pore pressure and hydrostatic pressure in surface
cracks. The field of predicting these events is called (+) slope stability analysis. These
events, which are a form of mass wasting, are often preceded by heavy rains
destabilizing the (*) surface layer. For the point, name these potentially catastrophic
movements of rock and sediment down a slope.

ANSWER: Mudslides (accept Landslides; accept Mudflows; accept Rockslides; accept
Flow Slides; prompt on "mass wasting" before mentioned)

(12) Due to this law, stress-strain curves have straight lines. This law can be
generalized as strain is proportional to stress in elastic materials. This law predicts
that (+) distance from equilibrium is negatively and directly proportional to the
restoring force. (*) For the point, name this law relating force to displacement, which
models the behavior of springs as "F equals negative kx."

ANSWER: Hooke's law

(13) Up-regulation of cytochrome P450 conveys resistance to this organo-chlorine
compound, which prevents sodium channels from closing. This chemical was (+)
implicated in declining peregrine falcon and bald eagle populations as it accumulated
in their prey. (*) For the point, name this pesticide that was largely banned following the
revelation that it thinned eggshells after the release of Rachel Carson's Silent Spring.

ANSWER: DDT (or Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane)

(14) Each atom in this material shares three sp2 hybridized orbitals, making it the
strongest of all currently known materials. Andre Geim [[GIME]] employed
micromechanical (+) exfoliation and a silicon wafer to isolate layers of this material
using Scotch tape and the primary component of (*) pencil lead. For the point, name this
2D carbon allotrope arranged in a single-layered hexagonal lattice.

ANSWER: Graphene (do not accept or prompt on "graphite")

(15) This law is extended to the enthalpy of a chemical reaction by Hess's law. This
law, which is often notated as "delta U equals Q minus W," is (+) equivalent to stating
that first kind perpetual motion machines are impossible. (*) For the point, name this
law that states that the total amount of mass-energy in a system is constant.

ANSWER: First Law of Thermodynamics (prompt on "Conservation of Energy"; prompt on
partial answers)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals - Middle School                                       Semifinals


(16) One controversial method for carrying out this task involves depositing a
certain substance into a subduction zone. (+) The primary method for carrying out
this task is called deep geological (*) repository. For the point, identify this task of safely
dealing with the waste products of fusion and fission.

ANSWER: Radioactive waste disposal (accept any answer indicating the disposal, storage,
or management of waste products from nuclear power plants or weapons)

(17) In The Analyst, George Berkeley [[BAR-klee]] used an error involving this value
in his critique of fluxions [[FLUK-shuns]] and infinitesimals. This value represents the
Turing degree of the partial (+) computable functions. This value represents the
bottom element of a bound lattice and is the cardinality of the empty (*) set. For the
point, name this number that creates an undefined expression as the denominator of a
fraction.

ANSWER: Zero (accept Naught or Nil)

(18) Lenski et al.'s ongoing evolution experiment with this species observed them
spontaneously developing the ability to metabolize citrate [[SIT-"rate"]]. In (+)
humans, beneficial strains of this species are involved in producing vitamin K in the
intestines. (*) For the point, name this rod-shaped gram negative gut bacteria, a common
model organism.

ANSWER: E. coli (or Escherichia coli)

(19) This location is the origin of toxic dust storms that spread tuberculosis and
cause cancer in former fishing towns such as Mo'ynoq [[MOY-nok]]. (+) Desertification
of this location was driven by agricultural diversion of the Syr Darya and (*) Amu
Darya rivers. For the point, name this now mostly dried up Central Asian lake, formerly
located on the border of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan.

ANSWER: Aral Seabed (or Aral Sea; accept Aralkum Desert)

(20) This field was founded and developed by the father-son pair D.D. and B.J.
Palmer. This field was founded on pseudo-scientific claims of the existence of (+)
lesions not visible on X-rays, termed vertebral subluxations [[sub-luk-SAY-shuns]]. (*)
For the point, name this field of alternative medicine based around performing spinal
"alignments."

ANSWER: Chiropractic (accept word forms like Chiropractor)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals - Middle School                                      Semifinals


(21) Scientists from this country include the author of Systema Naturae
[[NAH-tyoo-ray]]. A village in this country is the namesake of four (+) chemical
elements, including Ytterbium [[ee-TER-bee-um]]. The home country of Svante
Arrhenius [[SVAHN-teh ah-REE-nee-us]] and Arvid Carlsson, (*) for the point, what is
this country in which the presentation ceremonies of all three science Nobel Prizes are held?

ANSWER: Kingdom of Sweden (or Konungariket Sverige)

(22) One paradigm used in this language uses ggplot2 [[G-G-PLOT-TWO]] and dplyr
[[DEE-ply-er]] and is known as the tidyverse. Stable packages used in this language
can be (+) hosted by CRAN. This language is most commonly implemented in an
Integrated Development Environment called [this language] "Studio." (*) For the point,
name this open source programming language primarily used for data and statistical
analysis.

ANSWER: R (accept RStudio)

(23) This scientist described cultural features that are passed down in a way
analogous to genes with the coined term "meme." This scientist popularized the
gene-centered view of (+) evolution in books such as River Out of Eden and The Selfish
Gene. (*) For the point, name this British evolutionary biologist, known for his criticisms of
religion in his book The God Delusion.

ANSWER: Richard Dawkins

(24) This organ can be affected by cholesterolosis [[koh-leh-steh-RAH-loh-sis]],
which is also known as "strawberry" [this organ]. This organ can be (+) removed
when it accumulates painful amounts of calcium salts and cholesterol, forming this
organ's namesake (*) stones. For the point, name this organ that receives and stores bile
from the liver.

ANSWER: Gallbladder (accept Cholecyst; prompt on “gallstone”)

(25) Bartlett's test, a type of F-test, compares two values for this quantity, which is
also analyzed by a set of models developed by Ronald Fisher called ANOVA
[[ah-NO-vah]]. (+) The parameter lambda for a Poisson [[pwa-SAHN]] distribution
symbolizes both the expected value and this quantity, which is the square of the
standard (*) deviation. For the point, name this measure of how spread out a data set is.

ANSWER: Variance (accept Analysis of variance)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals - Middle School                                   Semifinals


(26) This scientist controversially refused to give her subjects numbers, instead
opting for names like "Goliath." This scientist observed one animal population using
twigs and grass to "fish" for termites. (+) This scientist observed a nonhuman "war"
between the Kasakela and Kahama communities of Gombe [[GOHM-beh]] (*) National
Park. For the point, name this English anthropologist and primatologist, a woman best
known for studying Tanzanian chimpanzees.

ANSWER: Jane Goodall (or Valerie Jane Morris-Goodall; or Baroness Jane van
Lawick-Goodall)

(27) Since 2019, Huawei [[HWAH-WAY]] has been banned from implementing this
technology in the U.S. due to espionage claims. Protestors in the UK who believed this
technology was responsible for (+) Covid-19 set fire to cell towers. The Samsung
Galaxy S20 was the first smartphone (*) compatible with this technology. For the point,
name this latest broadband cellular standard.

ANSWER: 5G NR (or 5G New Radio]

(28) As part of Project Nekton, this feature was explored by the Auguste Piccard
designed Trieste [[tree-ESS-teh]] vessel. One portion of this feature was explored by
the Kaiko and Nereus unmanned (+) submarines. This feature's southern end contains
its deepest point, the Challenger Deep. (*) Located near an American-controlled Pacific
island group, for the point, what is this deepest point in the ocean?

ANSWER: Mariana Trench (or Marianas Trench; accept Challenger Deep before
mentioned)

(29) These data structures connect all vertices of a graph with minimum edge
weights. The red-black variety of this data structure is self-balancing, differentiating
it from the binary search (+) variety, and the first node of this structure is known as
the root node. (*) For the point, name this type of data structure whose terminal nodes are
referred to as leaf nodes rather than branches.

ANSWER: Tree (accept Binary Search Tree before mentioned; accept Binary tree; prompt
on "graph" before mentioned)

(30) The most common methods for detecting these objects include the radial
velocity method and the transit method. When found in the habitable (+) zone, these
objects are said to be in the "goldilocks" zone. Examples of these objects include
super-Earths and (*) hot Jupiters. For the point, name these rocky or gaseous bodies that
orbit stars other than our Sun.

ANSWER: Exoplanets (accept any answer indicating extrasolar planets; accept answers
such as planets outside our solar system; prompt on "planet"s)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals - Middle School                                     Semifinals


Extra Question
(1)     This man's final book was a discourse on the study of motion and the study of
materials titled Two New Sciences. The publication of this man's (+) Dialogue
Concerning the Two Chief World Systems led to him being (*) condemned by the
inquisition for his heliocentrism. For the point, name this scientist who observed a group of
namesake moons of Jupiter.

ANSWER: Galileo Galilei (or Galileo Galilei)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                      Round 3 Middle School



Round 3 Middle School
Round 3 Tossups
(1)     Unique phenomena observed in this region include polar plumes and helmet
streamers. Solar wind originates from namesake "holes" found in this region. During this
layer's namesake "mass ejections," solar flares become more common. Spectrographic
analysis of this layer, which sits above the chromosphere, led to the discovery of helium. For
the point, name this outermost layer of the Sun, the name for which is Latin for "crown."

ANSWER: Stellar Corona (or Solar Corona; accept Coronal holes; accept Coronal mass
ejection)

(2)     Normality is defined as this quantity divided by the equivalence factor. Colligative
[[koh-LIH-gah-tiv]] properties only depend on this quantity and not on the properties of the
chemicals involved. This quantity for H+ [[H-PLUS]] ions determines Ph [[P-H]]. In diffusion,
particles move from areas with high values for this quantity to areas with low values of it.
For the point, name this quantity that can be measured in moles per liter, the abundance of a
constituent divided by its total volume.

ANSWER: Concentration (accept Molar Concentration)

(3)    This high-level language utilizes "duck typing" to make variable type declaration
unnecessary. Tim Peters wrote the "Zen of [this language]," a list of nineteen core principles
of this language such as "readability counts." This language represents the Boolean
[[BOO-lee-an]] operator with the word "and." For the point, name this dynamically-typed
computer language, whose name references a British comedy troupe.

ANSWER: Python

(4)     Joseph Lister made some of the first practical applications of this theory with his
antiseptics. Despite being demonstrated by Muslim doctors like Avicenna
[[ah-vee-SEH-nah]], this theory was originally discounted in favor of Galen's [[GAY-lens]]
miasma [[mee-AZ-muh]] theory in pre-modern Europe. Louis Pasteur is the father of, for the
point, what currently accepted theory of infectious transmission, which holds that diseases
are spread by pathogens?

ANSWER: Germ Theory of Disease
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 3 Middle School


(5)     This scientist's lectures were collected in the books Six Easy Pieces and Six Not So
Easy Pieces. This scientist presaged the field of nanotechnology in the lecture "There’s Plenty
of Room at the Bottom." The title of this scientist's autobiography starts with the phrase
Surely You're Joking. This scientist developed the path integral formulation of quantum
mechanics. For the point, name this Caltech physicist, whose namesake diagrams depict
particle behavior with arrows and squiggly lines.

ANSWER: Richard Feynman (or Richard Phillips Feynman; accept Feynman diagram;
accept Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!)

(6)     Frictional forces in this region cause zonal and meridional [[meh-RIH-dee-uh-nal]]
flow regimes. This region can be depicted with the three-cell model, which includes the
Hadley Cells. This layer extends for eleven miles above sea level at the equator, ending at its
"pause." Most of the Earth's weather occurs in this layer, which also has the majority of the
atmosphere's mass. For the point, name this lowest layer of the atmosphere.

ANSWER: Troposphere (prompt on "tropopause")

(7)     Due to exhibiting this phenomenon, an experiment carried out by Thomas Young
helped prove the wave nature of light. The Davisson–Germer experiment used scattering
and this phenomenon to demonstrate the wave-particle duality of electrons. An Airy disk is
a type of this phenomenon's patterns caused by a circular aperture. For the point, identify
this phenomenon in which a light beam bends after encountering a barrier or opening.

ANSWER: Diffraction

(8)     Due to a type of heating caused by these phenomena, volcanism is possible on
Jupiter's moon Io [["EYE"-oh]]. The namesake "locking" of these phenomena occurs when a
body's rotation and orbit become synchronized. On Earth, these phenomena are strongest at
a syzygy [[SIH-zih-jee]] and are called "springs," while the weakest types of these
phenomena are called "neaps." These phenomena are caused by the gravity of the Sun and
Moon on the ocean. For the point, name this regular rising and falling of ocean water.

ANSWER: Ocean Tides (or Tidal Forces; accept Tidal locking; accept Tidal heating,
working, or flexing; accept Spring tide; accept Neap tide)

(9)     This scientist used the Platonic solids to defend Copernicus in his Mysterium
Cosmographicum [[kahs-moh-GRAH-fee-kum]]. This scientist names a law that states equal
area is "swept out" in equal time by an orbiting body. This assistant to Tycho Brahe
[["TIE"-koh BRAH-heh]] was the first to demonstrate that a planet's orbit is an ellipse with
two foci [[FOH-kai]]. For the point, name this German astronomer who names three laws of
planetary motion.

ANSWER: Johannes Kepler (accept Kepler's laws of planetary motion; accept Kepler's
Second law of planetary motion)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 3 Middle School


(10) These were the first animals used in Richard G. Morris's spatial memory water
navigation tasks. These animals ran into a wall to make the namesake sound of Harvey
Carr's "kerplunk" experiment. This was the first animal that Little Albert was conditioned to
fear by John Watson. For the point, name these rodents who are often put through namesake
"races" in mazes as part of learning studies.

ANSWER: Rats (accept Ratrace; prompt on "rodent"; do not accept or prompt on "mice" or
"mouse")

(11) Underscattering is not used with these devices as part of the dark-field method.
Probe varieties of these devices use a piezoelectric [[pee-YEH-zoh-"electric"]] actuator tip to
map out surfaces. Extremely sensitive varieties of these devices include the atomic force and
electron tunneling varieties. Samples examined with these devices are typically placed on a
glass slide. For the point, name this lab device that is used to view small things.

ANSWER: Microscope (accept Dark-Field Microscope; accept Scanning Probe Microscope;
accept Atomic Force Microscope; accept Electron Tunneling Microscope; accept Compound
Microscope; accept Microscopy in place of Microscope)

(12) When k equals set size, the total number of combinations can be found by dividing
this function of n over this function of k times this function of the difference between n and
k. Applying this function to n gives the number of permutations for n unique objects. For the
point, name this function symbolized by an exclamation point, which is equal to the product
of all positive integers below a certain value.

ANSWER: Factorial

(13) In plants, this nutrient is synthesized by the shikimate [[shee-kee-MAH-teh]]
pathway. The antibiotic trimethoprim [["try"-MEH-thoh-prim]] works by targeting the
synthesis of this nutrient. Like cobalamin [[koh-BAH-lah-min]], this nutrient is essential for
one-carbon transfer oxidations. This nutrient is added to enriched grains to prevent a
namesake kind of megaloblastic anemia. Deficiency of this vitamin during early pregnancy
can lead to neural tube defects. For the point, name this B vitamin whose name derives from
being found in green leafy vegetables.

ANSWER: Folate (or Folic Acid; or Folacin; accept Vitamin B9; accept Tetrahydrofolate;
prompt on Vitamin "B")

(14) Along with adhesive forces, this phenomenon is responsible for capillary
[[KAP-ih-lay-ree]] action. This phenomenon is possible when a liquid's cohesion is greater
than its adhesion. This phenomenon is used by water striders to walk on the surface of lakes
and ponds. This phenomenon, which gives bubbles their shape, is weakened by surfactants
like detergents. For the point, name this force that holds water into droplets.

ANSWER: Surface Tension (prompt on "tension")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                      Round 3 Middle School


(15) During the Crimean War, this English scientist broke Vigenère's [[veezh-NEHRS]]
autokey cipher. Ada Lovelace is best known for developing punch cards for a proposed
invention made by this scientist. In 1991, the Science Museum in London created a replica of
the difference engine based on this man's notes. For the point, name this British
mathematician and early computer scientist, the inventor of the analytical engine.

ANSWER: Charles Babbage (accept Babbage's difference engine, Babbage's analytical
engine, or Babbage's engine)

(16) The cloverleaf form of a certain macromolecule binds to the e-site of these
structures. These structures are composed of "small" and "large" subunits, and can come in
free and membrane-bound varieties. The biogenesis of these structures occurs in the
nucleolus. Smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum are distinguished by the presence of
these structures, which serve as the site of RNA translation. For the point, name these
macromolecular machines that synthesize proteins.

ANSWER: Ribosomes (accept Small or Large Ribosomal subunit; accept Free ribosome;
accept Membrane-bound ribosome; accept Attached ribosome)

(17) This technology was first used commercially by Thomas Savery, who used it to
remove water from mines. Thomas Newcomen created a version of this technology capable
of giving continuous power through the use of pistons. This technology was proliferated by
James Watt and is frequently held to have kicked off the industrial revolution by powering
factories and trains. For the point, name this technology, a type of engine powered by boiling
water.

ANSWER: Steam Engine (accept Steam pump; accept Steam power; prompt on "engine")

(18) Umbraphiles are people who travel around the world to observe these events. The
change in the expected position of two stars during one of these events helped prove the
existence of gravitational lensing. Baily's Beads are formed by light shining through the
Moon's valleys during these events. For the point, name these events, whose total variety
occurs when the Moon almost entirely blocks out the Sun.

ANSWER: Solar Eclipse (accept Eclipse of the Sun; accept Total Solar Eclipse; prompt on
"eclipse"; do not accept or prompt on "Lunar Eclipse")

(19) A breath test for this compound can be used to assess stomach ulcer risk and the
presence of H. pylori [[H-"pie"-LOH-ree]]. With water, this compound is the end product of
the Bosch-Meiser [[BOSH-MY-zer]] process. Friedrich Wohler [[VOH-luh]] disproved
vitalism by inorganically synthesizing this compound. This compound's namesake cycle
forms it by combining two molecules of ammonia with one of carbon dioxide. For the point,
name this compound used in nitrogen excretion, which is found in urine.

ANSWER: Urea (or Carbamide; accept Urea cycle)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                     Round 3 Middle School


(20) Similar to alternators, these devices can be divided into brushed and brushless
varieties. Permanent magnet varieties of these devices lack field windings. An H-bridge can
be used to allow the DC type of these devices to run forward or backward. These devices
create torque from a rotor mounted in a stator. For the point, name this type of motor used
to power the Nissan Leaf and Tesla Model 3.

ANSWER: Electric Motor (accept Brushed or Brushless DC electric motor; accept
Permanent Magnet electric motor; accept DC electric motor; prompt on "motor")

(21) One theory of the weak force posits that these particles can absorb and release W
bosons, causing color change. Due to the phenomenon of color confinement, these particles
cannot exist on their own. These particles, which have negative one-third or positive
two-thirds charges, come in six flavors, including top, bottom, and strange. For the point,
name these fundamental particles which make up protons and neutrons.

ANSWER: Quarks (accept Top, Bottom, or Strange quarks)

(22) The "shocked" variety of this mineral is used as evidence for major meteor impacts,
such as the crater at Chicxulub [["CHICK"-soo-loob]]. This mineral is a seven on the Mohs
hardness scale and notably exhibits piezo [[pee-YEH-zoh]]-electricity. This mineral, which is
commonly found in sands, has an electric current passed through it to keep time in many
watches. For the point, name this mineral whose chemical name is silicon dioxide.

ANSWER: Quartz (accept Shocked quartz; accept Silicon Dioxide before mentioned;
prompt on "silica")

(23) The BdGPL-2 fungus causes chytridiomycosis [[kye-trih-dee-oh-my-KOH-sis]]
infections and mass die-offs of members of this class. Legless members of this class are
called caecilians [[kah-SEE-lee-uns]]. Like reptiles, members of this class possess a
three-chambered heart. Most members of this class undergo a metamorphosis from having
gills to air-breathing lungs. For the point, name this class of vertebrates that includes
salamanders and frogs, whose members live on both land and water.

ANSWER: Amphibians (or Amphibia; accept Caecilians before "class")

(24) Following groundwater intrusion, these objects can release maars. When formed
under an ice sheet, these objects can form tuyas. Most of the destruction caused by these
objects is the result of pyroclastic flows. When releasing low viscosity material, these
objects can form their "shield" variety. Commonly forming over hot spots and magma
chambers, for the point, what are these mountains that can erupt and release lava?

ANSWER: Volcanoes (accept Shield volcano; prompt on "mountains")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                         Round 3 Middle School


(25) The necessity of a transplant for this organ is determined using Banff classification.
This organ's glomerulus [[gloh-MEHR-yoo-luss]] is composed of small tufts of capillaries
and is enclosed by Bowman's capsule. This organ creates a countercurrent gradient with the
loop of Henle. This organ's functional units are called nephrons, and failure of this organ can
require the use of dialysis. For the point, name this bean-shaped filtration organ that comes
in pairs.

ANSWER: Kidneys

(26) While in Sweden, this man published his work Passions of the Soul, and this man
passed away after only giving Queen Cristina a few private lessons. This so-called "father of
analytical geometry" lends his name to the "coordinate system," and this man's Meditations
on First Philosophy contains the saying "cogito ergo sum" [[KOH-gee-toh EHR-goh SOOM]],
or "I think, therefore I am." For the point, name this French mathematician and philosopher.

ANSWER: René Descartes [[day-KAHRT]] (or Renatus Cartesius; prompt on "Cartesian
coordinates")

(27) The mineral form of this element's sulfide is the ore Galena [[gah-LEE-nah]]. This
element's tetra-ethyl compound was formerly widely used as a gasoline anti-knock additive.
This element is used in radiometric dating because both thorium and uranium ultimately
decay into it. This element is used in radiation shields for X-rays due to its high density. For
the point, name this toxic heavy metal whose atomic symbol is Pb.

ANSWER: Lead (accept Pb before mentioned)

(28) One type of this quantity named for Gibbs is equal to a heat engine variety defined as
SQ over T. This quantity is conserved in microscopic reversible processes, but is monotonic
[[mah-noh-TAH-nik]] in macroscopic processes. According to the Boltzmann–Planck
equation, this quantity is equal to k log W. For a perfect crystal at absolute zero, this quantity
equals zero. For the point, name this quantity, the measure of total disorder in a system.

ANSWER: Entropy (accept Gibbs entropy; prompt on "S")

(29) This planet's irregular moons are divided into Inuit [[IN-yoo-it]], Norse, and Gallic
groups. This planet is orbited by a moon with a possible ring system, Rhea [[REH-ah]]. This
planet is orbited by a moon with icy geyser structures, which were sampled by the Cassini
Orbiter. Another moon orbiting this planet is the only known moon to possess its own
atmosphere. For the point, name this sixth planet from the sun, which is orbited by a
brilliant ring system.

ANSWER: Saturn
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                  Round 3 Middle School


(30) Rapidly cooling liquified forms of this element can produce its amorphous "plastic"
allotrope. Lapis lazuli's [[LAH-pis LAHZ-yoo-lees]] blue color comes from this element's
negatively charged thiozone [["THIGH"-oh-"zone"]] ion. This element is used to strengthen
rubber through vulcanization. When bonded to two hydrogen atoms, this element makes a
compound that smells like rotten eggs. For the point, name this chalcogen [[KAL-soh-jen]]
with atomic number 16.

ANSWER: Sulfur (or S; accept Brimstone; accept Plastic sulfur)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 3 Middle School


Extra Question
(1)     This process names a syndrome associated with neural crest cell function and traits
such as spots and floppy ears. A team led by Dmitry Belyayev [[bel-YAH-yef]] has performed
studies of this process using silver foxes. Unlike taming, this process is inheritable. For the
point, name this process by which humans intentionally alter animals to be useful, which
resulted in modern dogs arising from a wolf-like ancestor.

ANSWER: Domestication (accept answers referring to domestic animals; do not accept or
prompt on "taming" or similar answers)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                          Round 4



Round 4 – Middle School
Round 4 Tossups
 (1)    In the fatigue form of this process, repeated application of force causes the spread of
striations. For ductile materials, this process occurs after strain hardening and necking at
the end point of a stress-strain curve. In highly brittle materials, this process occurs without
plastic deformation. This process occurs with the propagation of cracks. For the point, name
this process that occurs when stress causes solid objects to break in two.

ANSWER: Fracture (accept word forms; accept Cracking or Fatigue Crack before
mentioned)

(2)     Grignard [[green-YARD]] reagents are commonly stored in a ring-shaped solvent
with this functional group called THF. This functional group is made by reacting an alkyl
halide with an alcohol in a synthesis reaction named for Williamson. Three-atom cyclic
examples of these molecules are called epoxides. For the point, name this functional group
consisting of two carbon chains bonded to a single oxygen atom, whose "diethyl" type was
formerly a common anesthetic.

ANSWER: Ethers (accept Diethyl Ether)

(3)      Lewis Binford promulgated the "new" form of this field in a book that said this field
is "anthropology or it is nothing." The study of seemingly unimportant features in this field
was popularized by In Small Things Forgotten by James Deetz. Popular methodologies of this
field include remote sensing and analysis of physical culture. For the point, name this social
science field that involves excavating old human settlements.

ANSWER: Archaeology (accept word forms)

(4)     An ion in its lowest possible energy state is produced in a type of ionization process
with this property. The heat capacity ratio is often known as this property's index. This
property is usually only possible in insulated systems, because it only occurs when the
change in internal energy equals work. Along with reversibility, isentropic processes
possess this property. For the point, name this property of processes that have zero heat
transfer.

ANSWER: Adiabatic [[ah-dee-ah-BAH-tik]] (accept Adiabatic index)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                       Round 4


(5)     An organism's field metabolic rate is commonly measured by treatment with this
molecule, a type of DLW. The CANDU reactor uses this molecule as a neutron moderator to
avoid the need for enriched uranium. This common NMR solvent has a mass of 20 daltons
because of its two extra neutrons. For the point, name this molecule that contains two
deuterium atoms bonded to an oxygen atom and has a larger mass than a similar universal
solvent.

ANSWER: Heavy Water (or Deuterium Oxide; or D2O or 2H2O; prompt on "Deuterium";
do not accept or prompt on "water" or "H2O")

(6)     This mountain range is home to the only extant short faced bear, the spectacled bear.
This range's northern end is home to the Mountain Tapir, and this mountain range is the
natural habitat of chinchillas and guinea pigs. Wild camelids found in this mountain range
include the vicuña [[vih-KOO-nyah]] and guanaco [[gwah-NAH-koh]]. For the point, name
this South American mountain range home to alpacas and llamas.

ANSWER: Andes Mountains (or Cordillera de los Andes; accept Andean Mountains; prompt
on "Altiplano")

(7)     The Torino or Palermo scales are used to assess the risks posed by some of these
objects. Some of these objects that orbit in the L4 and L6 points of Jupiter and Neptune are
known as Trojans. The largest and first-discovered example of these objects was predicted
to exist by the debunked Bode's [[BOADS]] Law and is named Ceres [[SEE-rees]]. For the
point, name these large, rocky masses that orbit the sun in a namesake "belt."

ANSWER: Asteroids (accept Asteroid belt; prompt on "minor planet" or "planetoid")

(8)     This compound form is divided into driving and driven varieties based on whether it
has the potential to condense out of the atmosphere. This compound form is the most
abundant and potent greenhouse gas in Earth's atmosphere. Suddenly exceeding the
saturation point of this compound form in the atmosphere can lead to cloudburst
precipitation. Concentration of this compound form is measured as humidity. For the point,
name this greenhouse gas which condensates to form clouds.

ANSWER: Water Vapor (accept Aqueous vapor; prompt on "water"; prompt on "H20"; do
not accept or prompt on "Steam")

(9)     A class of painkillers named for the fact that they do not act on these hormones
includes aspirin and ibuprofen. Examples of these hormones include the androgen and
estrogen sex hormones. Cholesterol is in a class of precursors for these hormones, which
include stress hormones like cortisol. For the point, name these hormones, whose anabolic
variety are illegally used to grow muscle mass.

ANSWER: Steroids (accept Anabolic steroids; prompt on "Corticoids")
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                          Round 4


(10) The kinetic energy of the output of this effect is equal to the work function
subtracted from Planck’s constant times frequency. A coil with a spark gap was used to
observe this effect by Heinrich Hertz. Robert Millikan verified that this effect's output is
related to frequency but not intensity. Albert Einstein's 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics was for
his work on this effect. For the point, name this effect in which electrons are emitted under
light.

ANSWER: Photoelectric Effect

(11) Graham’s number uses this integer as a base for a hyperoperation, and there are this
many Frenet-Serret [[freh-NEH-seh-REH]] formulas, which in total concern this many
vectors. Apéry’s [[ah-PEH-rees]] constant is the value of the Riemann zeta function with this
integer as an input. The area of a polygon with this many sides can be calculated using
Heron’s formula. For the point, what number is the degree of a cubic polynomial?

ANSWER: Three

(12) The bites of these animals spread the malaria-like disease Babesiosis
[[bah-bee-see-OH-sis]] to humans. One disease spread by these animals can be diagnosed by
a bullseye rash. These animals are the primary vector for human infections of Rickettsia
rickettsii [[rih-KET-see-uh rih-KET-see-"eye"]], the causative agent of Rocky Mountain
Spotted Fever. For the point, name these parasitic arachnids, the primary carriers of Lyme
disease.

ANSWER: Ticks (or Ixodida; accept American dog ticks; accept Rocky Mountain Wood
Ticks; accept Brown dog ticks; accept Black-legged ticks; accept Bear ticks; accept Deer
ticks; prompt on "arachnids" before mentioned)

(13) The citrate of this element can be used to prevent kidney stones and is used as a
laxative to prepare for colonoscopies. Calcined dolomite can be used to purify this element.
This element's sulfate is often used for anti-inflammatory soaks and is called epsom salt. In
a flame test, this element emits bright white light. For the point, name this alkali earth metal
with number 12.

ANSWER: Magnesium (accept Mg; accept Magnesium citrate)

(14) This man died along with Colonel Vladimir Seryogin [[seh-ree-OH-gin]] while
piloting an experimental MiG-15 aircraft near the town of Novosyolovo [[no-vo-syo-LO-vo]].
During his most significant mission, this man allegedly said, "I don't see any God up here."
The pilot of Vostok I, for the point, who was this Soviet cosmonaut, the first human to reach
space?

ANSWER: Yuri Gagarin
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                             Round 4


(15) One of these organisms with both "a" and "alpha" mating types was the first
eukaryote [[yoo-KAY-ree-oat]] to have its genome entirely sequenced. These organisms
include    Candida    albicans   and    members      of   the    genus   Saccharomyces
[[sah-kah-roh-"MY"-sees]], which can release carbon dioxide and ethanol during
fermentation. For the point, name these single-celled fungi used during beer and bread
making.

ANSWER: Yeasts (accept Saccharomyces before mentioned; accept Saccharomyces
cerevisiae; prompt on "fungi")

(16) In the Earth's atmosphere, the Birkeland currents are carried by these substances.
These substances are confined with magnetic fields in a tokamak [[TOH-kah-mak]]. As in
electrolyte solutions, the range of a particle's electrostatic effect in this state is given as the
Debye [[deh-"BYE"]] length. Nuclear fusion is only possible if matter is in this state. For the
point, name this fourth state of matter, a collection of highly energized gas atoms found in
stars.

ANSWER: Plasma

(17) The presence of a three-body scatter spike on a radar map is indicative of the
presence of these objects. These objects maintain a liquid core due to releasing latent heat
during formation. These objects begin to form when supercooled water comes into contact
with dust nucleation sites. These objects form after repeated passing through updrafts in
cumulonimbus clouds during severe storms. For the point, name these icy objects that fall as
precipitation.

ANSWER: Hail stones

(18) This scientist inverted his benefactor's temperature scale to create the modern
Celsius system. This scientist's major work popularized a scientific racist theory of
classifying humans into four groups based on skin tone and alleged personality. This
scientist's Systema Naturae is credited with standardizing binomial nomenclature and
modern taxonomy. For the point, name this taxonomist who invented the modern Latin
naming convention for organisms.

ANSWER: Carl Linnaeus (or Carl von Linné; or Carolus Linnæus; prompt on “Linnaean
taxonomy” or “Linnaean system”)

(19) Exceeding this quantity in a certain medium results in the emission of Cherenkov
[[che-REN-kof]] radiation. Particles that can hypothetically exceed this quantity in a vacuum
are known as tachyons [[TAK-ee-ons]]. Mass energy equivalence is established by a formula
that sets energy equal to mass times this quantity squared. Represented as "c" in Einstein's
formula "e equals mc squared," for the point, what is this rate at which photons move?

ANSWER: Speed of Light (or Lightspeed; prompt on "c")
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                      Round 4


(20) Western people may be more susceptible to the Sander type of these phenomena
due to living in more regularly-shaped homes. One of these phenomena caused by lateral
neural inhibition is named for Ernst Mach [[MOCK]]. Many of these phenomena originate
from a confused figure-ground distinction. The autokinetic effect is one of these phenomena
that suggests movement. For the point, name these phenomena, which trick the brain into
processing visual data incorrectly.

ANSWER: Optical illusions (accept Visual illusions)

(21) This substance is composed of equal parts dichlorophenoxyacetic
[["die"-klo-ro-feh-NAHK-see-ah-SEH-tik]]        acid      and        trichlorophenoxyacetic
[["try"-klo-ro-feh-NAHK-see-ah-SET-tik]] acid. The first use of this substance occurred
during the Malaysian Emergency. This substance is the best known of the so-called Rainbow
Herbicides. For the point, name this defoliant used to clear out forests during the Vietnam
War.

ANSWER: Agent orange

(22) The most remote portions of this region are primarily covered in hematite
[[HEE-mah-"tight"]] rich "red clay." This region is home to formations such as black and
white smokers. Cold seeps along this region can result in the formation of brine pools.
Organisms that live near this region are collectively known as benthos, which often cluster
around hydrothermal vents. For the point, name this rocky region at the bottom of the
ocean.

ANSWER: Sea floor (or Ocean floor; accept Bed in place of Floor; accept Bottom in place
of Floor before mentioned)

(23) This molecule's receptors are activated by a class of hallucinogenic drugs that
includes psilocin [["SIGH"-loh-sin]] and LSD. When prepared for gastrointestinal use, this
molecule is synthesized and secreted by enterochromaffin [[en-teh-roh-KROH-mah-fin]]
cells, which synthesize it from tryptophan [[TRIP-toh-fan]]. Lexapro, Zoloft, and Prozac are
name brand examples of this neurotransmitter's selective re-uptake inhibitors. For the
point, name this appetite and mood-regulating neurotransmitter.

ANSWER: Serotonin [[seh-roh-TOH-nin]] (accept 5-hydroxytryptamine; or 5-HT)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                            Round 4


(24) The transpose of a matrix with this property always equals its inverse. A triangle's
circumcenter lies at the intersection of lines named for this property, which is also
possessed by two vectors whose dot product equals zero. Two lines with opposite reciprocal
slopes have this relative property. For the point, name this property of lines that meet at 90
degree angles.

ANSWER: Perpendicularity (accept Orthogonality; accept Normal; accept Orthonormal;
accept Right angles or 90 degree angles before mentioned; prompt on "bisector" or
"bisecting")

(25) Along with Echinodermata [[ee-kai-no-der-MAH-tah]] and acorn worms, members
of this phylum are deuterostomes [[doo-TEH-roh-stohms]], meaning they have a separate
mouth and anus. Members of this phylum possess either pharyngeal [["fair"-en-JEE-ahl]]
pouches or pharyngeal slits while in their embryonic state. For the point, name this animal
phylum named for possessing a namesake cartilage tube or backbone.

ANSWER: Chordata (or Chordates)

(26) The Faber-Jackson and Tully-Fisher equations relate the stellar velocity dispersion
of these entities to their luminosity, and Hubble’s tuning fork diagram is used to classify
these entities. In approximately four billion years, two of these will collide, creating an entity
named "Milkomeda" [["milk"-AH-meh-dah]]. Coming in irregular, spiral, and elliptical
varieties, for the point, what are these large collections of dust, dark matter, and stars, of
which Andromeda is one?

ANSWER: Galaxy (accept Galaxies; accept Milkomeda galaxy or Milkdromeda galaxy;
accept Andromeda galaxy; accept Irregular, Spiral, or Elliptical galaxy)

(27) Biospheres located along these systems are classified as crenon, rhithron, and
potamon [[poh-TAH-mun]]. Studies of these systems introduced Strahler [[STRAY-ler]]
numbers for describing branch order. Riparian [["rye"-"PAIR"-ee-an]] zones form buffer
areas around these systems. Cutting off sections of these bodies of water forms oxbow lakes.
For the point, name these bodies of water that flow into the sea at deltas.

ANSWER: Rivers (accept more narrow synonyms such as Stream, Brook, Creek, or
Rivulet)

(28) The cold molding method of making these objects involves binding thin pieces of
wood together with epoxy to produce rigidity. The transom supports of these devices
connect to the sterndrive. These devices are divided into inboard and outboard motor
varieties based on the placement of their propeller. These devices can be steered by
redirecting fluid with a rudder. For the point, name these vehicles, examples of which
include canoes.

ANSWER: Boat (or Ship; accept Motor Boat before "canoe" is mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                       Round 4


(29) These entities can be described using only mass, angular momentum, and charge,
rendering them “hairless.” An object approaching one of these entities will become
increasingly redshifted and eventually stop moving, and the boundary of that occurrence
with these objects is known as the event horizon. For the point, name these gravitational
singularities from which even light cannot escape.

ANSWER: Black holes

(30) During the winter in South Korea, frozen sausages are often used to interact with
this technology. Extended use of this technology without rest can lead to a repetitive motion
injury commonly known as "gorilla arm." Mobile devices often employ haptics to improve
user experience with this technology. Pinches and multi-finger swipes are common gestures
used with this technology. For the point, name this technology used to give inputs when
using smartphones.

ANSWER: Touch screen (accept descriptive answers involving screens which are operated
by touch)
2020-21 Science Bee Nationals – Middle School                                 Round 4


Extra Question
(1)    A grip-assisting extension of this animal's sesamoid [[SEH-sah-moyd]] bone was
used as an example of a spandrel in a Stephen Jay Gould essay titled for this animal's
"thumb." Due to their lack of interest in mating in captivity, a method of artificial
insemination using liquid nitrogen was developed. For the point, name these black and
white bamboo-eating bears from China.

ANSWER: Giant Pandas (or Ailuropoda melanoleuca; accept Panda bears)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 2 Middle School



Round 2 Middle School
Round 2 Tossups
(1)    The lift-inducing variety of this force can be increased with a larger aspect ratio of
an aerofoil. Lord Rayleigh [[RAY-lee]] devised the quadratic form of this force, which is
proportional to the square of an object's velocity. This force's namesake coefficient is
composed of the impact from the parasitic and skin-friction types of this force. For the point,
name this force, the resistance to motion through a fluid.

ANSWER: Drag (accept Lift-induced, induced, or vortex drag; accept Drag due to lift; accept
Quadratic drag; accept Drag coefficient; prompt on "friction" before mentioned)

(2)     One of these structures named Strokkur [[STROH-koor]] was first made by an
Icelandic earthquake in the late 1700s. These structures name a type of siliceous
[[sih-LIH-syuss]] sinter which commonly makes up their "cone" variety. These structures
are distinguished from perpetual spouters by their discharge-recharge cycle. For the point,
name this kind of erupting hot spring, which include Old Faithful in Yellowstone.

ANSWER: Geyser (accept Cone geyser; prompt on "hot springs")

(3)     One law describing this phenomenon gives the step up and step down voltage for a
transformer. Faraday's Law of this phenomenon predicts the production of EMF through it.
This phenomenon is used by circuit elements whose strength is measured in units named
for Joseph Henry. This phenomenon is the primary mechanism for wireless charging. For the
point, name this phenomenon in which a current is generated from a change in the magnetic
field.

ANSWER: Electromagnetic Induction (or Magnetic Induction; accept Faraday's Law of
Induction)

(4)     When one of these organelles is broken up, microsomes are formed. Proteins tagged
with the retention motifs KKXX and KDEL are unable to leave the membrane of this
organelle. COPII [["COP"-"TWO"]] is used to tag proteins being transported from this
organelle to the Golgi [["GOAL"-jee]] apparatus. For the point, name this organelle that
serves as a cell's main transportation system and surrounds the nucleus.

ANSWER: Endoplasmic Reticulum (or ER; accept Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum or
Rough ER; accept Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum or Smooth ER)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                     Round 2 Middle School


(5)    This man proposed his most important mathematical ideas in the book The Laws of
Mathematical Thought. Statements named for this man can be simplified using a Karnaugh
[[KAR-noh]] Map. A satisfiability problem named for this man was the first such problem to
be proven to be NP-complete. For the point, name this English logician whose namesake
algebra uses ones and zeros to represent "true" and "false."

ANSWER: George Boole (accept Boolean Algebra; accept Boolean Satisfiability Problem)

(6)     Due to the Coriolis [[koh-ree-OH-liss]] force, the direction of these phenomena is
described by the Ekman spiral. The deep variety of these phenomena is driven by
thermohaline [[ther-moh-HAY-leen]] circulation. These phenomena form the confines of
gyres [[GIRES]] such as the Sargasso Sea. Benjamin Franklin was the first person to chart
one of these phenomena in the Atlantic Ocean. The Gulf Stream is a prominent warm-water
version of these phenomena. For the point, name these large flows of water that circulate
water through the world's oceans.

ANSWER: Ocean Currents

(7)     The equivalence ratio describes the ideal mix of reactants for performing this
reaction. The temperature at which a volatile compound undergoes this reaction most
readily is called the flashpoint. Smoldering is an extended, slow rate form of this reaction.
The incomplete form of this reaction produces carbon monoxide and solid carbon instead of
the typical CO2 and water. For the point, name this form of rapid exothermic redox reactions
in which fuel is burned.

ANSWER: Combustion (accept Incomplete combustion; accept Burning before mentioned;
accept answers indicating Flames or Fire before "flash point," and prompt afterward;
prompt on "oxidation," "reduction," or "redox" reactions)

(8)     This disease's primary subtypes are the ductal and lobular varieties. This disease's
likelihood is increased by the presence of mutations to the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.
Surgical treatments for this disease include a lumpectomy or a mastectomy. Awareness
groups for this disease use pink ribbon logos. For the point, name this cancer, found most
commonly in women, which can be detected with a mammogram.

ANSWER: Breast Cancer (accept Ductal carcinoma; accept Lobular carcinoma; prompt on
"cancer")
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 2 Middle School


(9)     Devices used for this technique sometimes utilize cooling tubes called condensers to
re-liquify the product of this technique. The fractional form of this technique is used to
refine petroleum products. This technique, which cannot separate azeotropes
[[AY-zee-oh-tropes]] without an additional component, is used to produce spirits from
fermented products. For the point, name this technique of separating mixtures based on
boiling point.

ANSWER: Classical Distillation (accept Fractional distillation)

(10) The discovery that these objects were once much more plentiful in the early
universe helped refute the steady-state thesis. Gravitational lensing can cause multiples of
these objects to appear, as in an Einstein cross. These objects form where a supermassive
black hole rapidly accretes new matter, emitting energetic jets and winds. For the point,
name these highly luminous active galactic nuclei.

ANSWER: Quasars (accept Quasi-Stellar Radio Sources; accept Quasi-Stellar Objects or
QSOs; prompt on "Active Galactic Nuclei" or "AGN" before read)

(11) The enzyme gamma-glutamyl carboxylase [[kar-BAHK-sih-"lace"]] uses this nutrient
as a cofactor for the production of GLA proteins. The most common types of this nutrient are
phylloquinone [[fih-loh-KWY-nohn]] and menaquinone [[meh-nah-KWY-nohn]]. This
vitamin, which is synthesized by gut bacteria, is often given as a shot to newborn babies to
prevent hemorrhaging. For the point, name this vitamin found in dark, leafy plants, which is
necessary for blood clotting.

ANSWER: Vitamin K

(12) This material releases heat as it cures, requiring coolants such as water or liquid
nitrogen to be pumped through it as it sets. This material's reinforced type is augmented
with steel rebar. This material is composed of rough aggregate held together with a binding
agent. For the point, name this material made of stone set in cement that is used to make
structures such as buildings and dams.

ANSWER: Concrete (accept Reinforced concrete; prompt on "cement" until mentioned)

(13) The energy of these particles can be calculated by multiplying the Planck constant
times frequency. Young's double-slit experiment showed that these particles can interfere
with themselves. The collision of these particles with metals can release electrons as part of
a certain "electric" effect. These bosons are the carrier of the electromagnetic force. For the
point, name these massless particles, the quanta of light.

ANSWER: Photons
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 2 Middle School


(14) Harvests of this crop can be devastated by outbreaks of Ramu stunt. Bagasse
[[bah-GAHSS]] is a potential energy source produced as a byproduct of this crop, of which
Brazil is the world's leading producer. Production of this crop in the Caribbean is the largest
driving force in deforestation in the region. Molasses is a valuable byproduct from
processing this crop. For the point, name this perennial grass, a crop grown to produce a
namesake sweet substance.

ANSWER: Sugarcane (prompt on "Sugar")

(15) When cracks in this material are filled with a siliceous [[sih-LIH-see-yuss]] ironstone
matrix, it is known as this material's "boulder" form. The Australian town of Lightning Ridge
is famous for producing this material's "black" form. This material fluoresces UV light and
can create rainbow-like reflections. For the point, name this hydrated, amorphous type of
silica, whose gem grade varieties are noted for their iridescence.

ANSWER: Opal (accept Boulder opal; accept Black opal; prompt on "Silica" before
mentioned)

(16) These events are believed to be the source of all of the universe's heavy elements.
One type of these events occur when the mass of an inert core overcomes degeneracy
pressure, causing core collapse. The 1a type of these events are used as a standard candle
and occur when a white dwarf exceeds the Chandrasekar [[chahn-drah-SEH-kar]] limit. For
the point, name these extremely bright stellar events, the explosion of a star.

ANSWER: Supernova (accept Type 1A Supernova; prompt on "SN" or "SNe"; do not accept
or prompt on "nova")

(17) The most common type of this ecosystem is the "fringing" variety, which grows in
shallow waters just below the surface. These ecosystems can create atolls when the island
around which they grow erodes below sea level. These ecosystems are formed from colonies
of polyps held together by calcium carbonate. For the point, name this ecosystem, the largest
of which is the Great Barrier in Australia.

ANSWER: Coral Reef (accept Fringing reef or Fringing coral reef; prompt on "Reef" or
"Great Barrier Reef")

(18) In fruit flies, these phenomena involve the PER/TIM loop. Environmental cues called
zeitgebers [[ZITE-geh-buhs]] entrain these phenomena which are triggered by the release of
melatonin from the pineal [[pih-NEE-ahl]] gland. Exposure to artificial blue light can disrupt
these      phenomena,      which     are     controlled    by       the      suprachiasmatic
[[soo-prah-kai-ahs-MAH-tik]] nucleus. For the point, name this phenomenon, the body's
natural sleep-wake cycle.

ANSWER: Circadian Rhythm (or Circadian Clock; or Circadian Cycle)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                       Round 2 Middle School


(19) In a Birch reduction, a solution of this element is dissolved in ammonia, where it
forms a double bond with benzene. This element was first isolated by Sir Humphrey Davy by
using electrolysis [[ee-lek-TRAH-lih-siss]] on this element's hydroxide, which is also called
caustic soda, or lye. This element is exchanged with potassium in an active transport pump.
For the point, name this element that reacts with chlorine to form table salt.

ANSWER: Sodium (accept Na; or Natrium)

(20) The highest point on this body is Ahuna [[ah-HOO-nah]] Mons, which is covered in
bright salt deposits left by cryo-volcanism. Along with Uranus, this body's existence was
predicted by the now-debunked Titius-Bode [[TIH-tee-us BOAD]] law. Along with Vesta, this
sole dwarf planet of the inner Solar System was visited by the Dawn spacecraft. For the
point, name this largest asteroid, which is named for the Roman goddess of the harvest.

ANSWER: 1 Ceres

(21) One of the oldest treatises on this profession was written by the Indian thinker
Sushruta [[soo-SHROO-tah]], which forms the basis of the Ayurveda [[ah-yoor-VEH-dah]]
form of this profession. Much modern knowledge of the historical western practice of this
profession derives from the works of Galen [[GAY-len]]. The code of ethics governing this
profession is often written to include the phrase "first, do no harm." For the point, name this
profession which is governed by the Hippocratic oath.

ANSWER: Medicine (accept Medical; accept Doctors; accept Healing; accept Surgery;
accept synonymous answers)

(22) This element can be n-doped with phosphorus and p-doped with boron. This
element's crystalline form is the primary component of photovoltaic cells. Integrated
circuits frequently utilize a thinly sliced "wafer" of this element. This element is the most
common material used in modern semiconductors. For the point, name this element with
atomic number 15, which sits directly below carbon on the periodic table.

ANSWER: Silicon (or Si)

(23) The most dangerous part of this disease originally came from CTX-phi [[C-T-X-fai]]
bacteriophages [[bak-TEE-ree-oh-fay-jes]]. This disease, which is caused by a namesake
bacteria-derived toxin, is sometimes called The Blue Death. The main treatment for this
disease involves lightly sweetened water-based liquids or oral rehydration therapy. For the
point, name this bacterial disease spread by contaminated drinking water, which causes
diarrhea so severe it can cause fatal dehydration.

ANSWER: Cholera (accept Cholera toxin or Choleragen; accept Blue Death before
mentioned)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                     Round 2 Middle School


(24) This constellation's lower left contains the Horsehead Nebula. This constellation's
namesake nebula contains the Trapezium [[trah-PEE-zee-um]] Cluster. This constellation
contains the Amazon Star, Bellatrix [[BEH-lah-triks]]. The stars Alnitak [[al-nih-TAHK]],
Alnilam [[al-nee-LAHM]], and Mintaka [[min-TAH-kah]] make up this constellation's
namesake "belt." This constellation's brightest stars are Rigel [["RYE"-jel]] and Betelgeuse
[[BEH-tel-"juice"]]. For the point, name this constellation depicting a hunter from Greek
mythology.

ANSWER: Orion (accept Orion nebula or Great Orion nebula; accept Orion's belt)

(25) This organ can possess a benign accessory duct named for Giovanni Domenico
Santorini. This organ releases its namesake digestive juices into the small intestine through
the Duct of Wirsung [[VEER-zoong]]. This organ's endocrine-producing cells are contained
within the Islets of Langerhans. Type One diabetes is caused by the immune system
attacking this organ's beta cells. For the point, name this organ that secretes insulin.

ANSWER: Pancreas (accept Pancreas juice(s))

(26) Thermal effects can induce super-paramagnetic limits in these devices. Modern
computers typically replace these devices with solid-state technology. Individual blocks of
data in these devices can be retrieved in any order, allowing for random-access memory. For
the point, name this component of a computer used for long-term storage, whose capacity
can be measured in terabytes or megabytes.

ANSWER: Hard Drive (or Hard Disk Drive; or HDD; or Fixed Disk; prompt on "storage" or
"disk"; do not accept or prompt on "memory")

(27) This entity is theorized to primarily exist within a namesake "halo." This entity can
be indirectly observed through anomalies in galactic rotation curves. Candidates for the
composition of this entity include GIMPS, WIMPS, and sterile neutrinos. This entity gets its
name from interacting with gravity but not electromagnetic radiation, making it hard to
detect. For the point, name this form of matter which is believed to make up 80 percent of
the known mass in the universe.

ANSWER: Dark Matter (accept Dark Matter halo; do not accept or prompt on "dark
energy")

(28) According to Carmichael's Theorem, for every value over twelve, the nth member of
this construct will have at least one unique prime divisor. This construct's closed-form
expression can be found with Binet's [[bih-NEHS]] formula. This construct converges at the
golden ratio and is illustrated with a tiling spiral. For the point, identify this sequence
named for an Italian mathematician, whose first five numbers are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.

ANSWER: Fibonacci Sequence (or Fibonacci Numbers)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                     Round 2 Middle School


(29) This scientist posited the existence of an "aperiodic crystal" in the book What is
Life?, which later inspired the discovery of DNA. This scientist's namesake equation governs
the wave function of a quantum-mechanical system. This scientist created a thought
experiment involving a Geiger counter, a hammer, and poison to illustrate flaws with the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. For the point, name this Austrian
physicist who is best remembered for theorizing a cat who is both dead and alive.

ANSWER: Erwin Schrödinger (or Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrödinger; accept
Schrödinger's Cat; accept Schrödinger equation)

(30) Mike Alder created a philosophical razor named for this man's "flaming laser sword."
In one thought experiment, this scientist imagined a cannon tall enough to fire a cannonball
into orbit. This scientist names the standard SI unit of force, and, coinciding with Leibniz
[[LIBE-nitz]], this author of Principia Mathematica independently developed calculus. For
the point, name this English physicist who described the three laws of motion and a
namesake law of universal gravitation.

ANSWER: Isaac Newton (or Sir Isaac Newton; accept Newton's flaming laser sword; accept
Newton's laws of motion)
2020-21 MS Science Bee Nationals                                     Round 2 Middle School


Extra Question
(1)     This disease can be prevented with the Bacillus Calmette-Guérin [[bah-SIH-lus
kal-MET-gweh-RAHN]] vaccine. Pott disease is a variety of this condition that infects the
spine. This disease can be treated with the four-drug RIPE [["RIPE"]] regimen. The
formation of a bump under the skin in the Mantoux [[man-TOO]] test is a positive sign for
this disease which presents as nodules that can be viewed with a chest x-ray. For the point,
name this respiratory disease caused by mycobacterium, which was historically called
consumption.

ANSWER: Tuberculosis (or TB; accept Consumption before mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                              Science Bee 1 - Finals



Science Bee 1 - Finals
Finals Tossups
(1)     Along with snakes, this is the largest class of animals to use the ZW chromosome sex
determination system. This class includes the closest living relatives of crocodiles and
alligators. Archaeopteryx was originally identified as the oldest member of this class.
Animals in this class are the direct descendants of theropod dinosaurs. Comprised of warm-
blooded vertebrates, for the point, what is this class of feathered animals, most of which can
fly.

ANSWER: Aves (accept [a]avian[a/]s; prompt on "birds")

(2)     One type of this technique uses sulfur dioxide and iodine to quantify the presence of
water and is named for Karl Fischer. Fast Sulphon Black and EDTA are used in the
"complexometric" form of this technique. Bromophenol blue and phenolphthalein are used
as color-changing pH indicators in this technique, which uses a burette to add solution to
the analyte. For the point, name this technique used to determine the concentration of an
unknown solution.

ANSWER: titration

(3)     These bodies are prevented from collapsing by electron degeneracy pressure. The
Chandrasekar [[chan-druh-SEH-kar]] limit is the upper bound to the mass of these bodies.
Sirius B is one of these bodies which orbits a larger star. These bodies are the most common
endpoint for main-sequence stars. For the point, name these small stellar remnants which
are less massive than a neutron star or black hole.

ANSWER: white dwarfs

(4)     Boundaries between p- and n-type semiconductors act as a simple one of these
devices. These devices can change flow when their breakdown voltage is exceeded by their
reverse bias. These devices are represented as triangles connecting straight lines on circuit
diagrams. These devices typically only allow current to pass under forward bias conditions.
For the point, name these devices which allow current to only flow in one direction and
include a light-emitting variety.

ANSWER: diodes
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                              Science Bee 1 - Finals


(5)      John Searle refuted this mathematician's namesake test with the Chinese Room
thought experiment. That test named for this mathematician is explained with the
"imitation game." This mathematician's namesake theoretical machine consists of a
computer that manipulates symbols on an infinite tape. For the point, name this English
mathematician, who names a test which can determine if a computer possesses strong
artificial intelligence.

ANSWER: Alan Turing

(6)    This statement is an equivalent for one named for Proclus. This statement can be
replaced by an "at most" statement called Playfair's axiom. Lobachevsky and Bolyai name a
system in which this statement does not hold known as hyperbolic geometry. For the point,
name this fifth of Euclid’s postulates which states that there is a unique line through a point
that does not intersect with another line.

ANSWER: parallel postulate (accept Euclid's fifth postulate before mentioned)

(7)     The cuckoo is known as a "brood" type of these organisms, and Plasmodium is a
protist which is also one of these organisms. A tropical fungus that acts as one of these
organisms can alter the behavior of ants. It’s not mutualism or commensalism, since
organisms in a symbiotic relationship with these organisms are harmed. For the point,
name these organisms which target hosts to gain benefits, examples of which include
tapeworms and leeches.

ANSWER: Parasites

(8)     Synthesis reactions of these molecules are described as "living" if they cannot
terminate or have a low polydispersity index. The size of these molecules is often reported
as a molecular weight. A free radical initiator can begin synthesis of these molecules
through a chain-growth mechanism, which forms examples of them like PVC and Nylon. For
the point, what long molecules are made of repeating subunits called monomers?

ANSWER: polymers

(9)     This body contains the Tombaugh Region, which resembles a large, white heart. A
large, dark region on this body is known as Cthulhu Macula [[kuh-THOO-loo MAK-yoo-luh]].
Minor moons orbiting this body include Nix, Kerberos, and Hydra. This body is the largest
object in the Kuiper [[KIGH-per]] belt. This body is sometimes considered to be a double
planet with its largest moon, Charon [[KAIR-on]]. For the point, name this dwarf planet,
which was formerly classified as the ninth planet from the sun.

ANSWER: Pluto
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                             Science Bee 1 - Finals


(10) Telescopes based on this process were created to fix the problem of chromatic
aberration. The angle where polarized light does not undergo this process is named after
David Brewster and comes in specular and diffuse forms. At the critical angle, the "total
internal" type of this process occurs, which is used in fiber-optic cables. The angle of
incidence equals the angle of, for the point, what process in which light bounces off of
surfaces like mirrors?

ANSWER: reflection (accept word forms; do not accept "refraction")

(11) Venezuela created one of these resources based on the value of oil which was called
El Petro. The most prominent of these resources was developed by the pseudonymous
Satoshi Nakamoto. These resources are mined through solving hash functions and typically
employ blockchain to form a distributed ledger. For the point, name these digital currencies
which include Ethereum and Bitcoin.

ANSWER: cryptocurrency (prompt on "digital currency" before mentioned)

(12) The "line" and "surface" types of this operation are related by the generalized Stokes
theorem. Partial fraction decomposition and u-substitution are used to evaluate this
operation, whose "indefinite" form requires adding the constant "plus C." The trapezoidal
rule or Riemann sums can be used to approximate this operation. Differentiation is the
inverse of, for the point, what calculus operation which finds the area under a curve?

ANSWER: integration (or finding the integral; accept antiderivative; accept
antidifferentiation)

(13) The reproductive cycles of these entities can be described as lytic or lysogenic.
Surrounded by a protein coat called a capsid, examples of these entities that infect bacteria
are often called "phages." Infections caused by these pathogens cannot be treated with
antibiotics, and thus they are often countered with vaccines. Smallpox and measles are
caused by, for the point, which pathogens, examples of which include HIV and influenza?

ANSWER: viruses

(14) A strong intermolecular variety of these interactions causes water to have a high
boiling point. Carbon is only capable of participating in these interactions when it is
bounded to highly electronegative elements. These interactions typically occur with
nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine and their namesake element. For the point, name these atomic
dipole interactions named for the first element of the periodic table.

ANSWER: hydrogen bonds
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                             Science Bee 1 - Finals


(15) The rate of transport of these structures is measured in sverdrup. Examples of these
structures located far below the surface are driven by Thermohaline Circulation. When
these structures make a complete, rotating loop they form a gyre [[GIRE]]. One of these
structures off the west coast of South America is named for Humbolt while one running
from North America to Europe is named the Gulf Stream. For the point, name these large
directed flows of water found in the ocean.

ANSWER: Ocean currents

(16) To carry out the inertial confinement version of this process, deuterium-tritium
pellets are rapidly heated and compressed. A theoretical type of this process would occur at
room temperature and is known as its "cold" type. Heavier elements are formed from this
process via the CNO cycle. This process forms helium via the proton-proton chain in the
center of stars. For the point, name this process in which atomic nuclei are combined, often
contrasted with fission.

ANSWER: nuclear fusion

(17) This country's inland deserts are home to the thorny devil, a small lizard covered in
large spikes. One animal from this county possesses a venomous barb on its hind feet. That
animal from this country is the only mammal known to have electroreception. This country
is home to the vast majority of the world's eucalyptus tree species. For the point, name this
country, whose native wildlife includes the platypus, koala, and kangaroo.

ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia

(18) In children, these organs can be impacted by a type of cancer called Wilms' tumor.
These organs maintain a concentration gradient using the loop of Henle [[HEN-lee]]. The
functional units of these organs are known as nephrons, and these organs are linked to the
bladder by the ureters. When these organs fail, patients may be placed on dialysis. For the
point, name this pair of organs which filter blood and produce urine.

ANSWER: kidneys

(19) When two of these structures symmetrically overlap, they can undergo namesake
"twinning." 2-d changes in these structures can form grain boundaries. These structures are
composed of several unit cells arranged into a namesake lattice, and disruptions to the long-
range order of these structures create their namesake defects. For the point, name this type
of solid, composed of regular, repeating ordered units of atoms, exemplified by gemstones
such as diamonds.

ANSWER: crystals
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                            Science Bee 1 - Finals


(20) A standard formula for calculating this quantity is "X of g plus energy." This quantity
can be averaged with electron affinity to calculate electronegativity. This quantity, which
increases from left to right and from bottom to top, is highest for helium. For the point,
name this quantity representing the energy required to remove an electron from an atom.

ANSWER: first ionization energy

(21) This specific process was the primary cause for the extinction of the Spix's macaw in
the wild. A field called a "swidden" can be created when this process is done during "slash-
and-burn" agriculture. Habitat loss due to this process has endangered both the Sumatran
orangutan and the pygmy sloth, which lives in red mangroves. Wildfires and logging efforts
contribute to, for the point, what ecological problem which has caused the rapid shrinkage
of the Amazon jungle?

ANSWER: deforestation (or clearance; or clearing; or clearcutting; accept cutting down
trees or obvious equivalents; accept removing trees; accept forest degradation or
equivalents; accept logging before mentioned; prompt on "habitat damage" or "habitat
loss" or "habitat destruction"; prompt on "agriculture")

(22) The last people to complete this task were Gene Cernan and Jack Schmitt. China's
Chang'e [[CHAHNG-EH]] 3 and 4 missions were the first non-damaging completions of this
task since 1976. The Tranquility base was created after the first completion of this task on
the first mission to achieve this task, Apollo 11. For the point, name this task, which was
first achieved by Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong.

ANSWER: moon landing (accept any answer indicating landing a
person/ship/probe/rover/etc on the moon)

(23) Hemoglobin exists as both an R, or relaxed, form and another form denoted by this
letter. The MHC complex binds receptors on cells named for this letter, which mature in the
thymus and come in types such as "cytotoxic" or "helper." In RNA, uracil replaces a
nucleotide symbolized by this letter, which forms base pairs with adenine in DNA. For the
point, name this letter which represents the nucleobase thymine.

ANSWER: T (accept T cells, accept taut or tense before "letter")

(24) These structures can be predicted by the appearance of a hook echo on Pulse-
Doppler Radar. Powerful types of these structures can be formed by supercells. The
strength of these structures is measured with the Fujita [[foo-JEE-tuh]] scale. Unlike
hurricanes, these much smaller structures do not need warm water to form. For the point,
name these rapidly spinning winds which typically form during severe thunderstorms.

ANSWER: tornadoes (prompt on "storms," "thunderstorms," or similar answers)
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                               Science Bee 1 - Finals


(25) According to legend, this thinker drowned one of his students for discovering
irrational numbers. This thinker provided the earliest account of music of the spheres and
discovered the relationship between mathematical ratios and musical intervals. This
thinker's namesake theorem is stated as A squared plus B squared equals C squared. For the
point, name this ancient Greek philosopher who names a theorem in geometry used for
finding the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle.

ANSWER: Pythagoras of Samos (prompt on "Pythagorean")

(26) Similar proteins produced by two parts of this structure lead to self-incompatibility,
and the largest of these structures, from the genus Rafflesia, emit an odor of rotting flesh. In
monocots, the parts of this structure are arranged in multiples of three. A calyx protects a
developing one of these structures, whose perfect examples contain both stamens and
pistils. Pollinators gather nectar from, for the point, which reproductive plant structures
with colorful petals?

ANSWER: flowers (or blooms; or blossoms)

(27) As these objects break up, they can make their namesake "seltzer" hiss by releasing
trapped CO2 [[SEE-OH-TWO]]. The two most common shapes for these objects are called
tabular and non-tabular. These objects are formed by calving or the breakup of glaciers at
the shore. For the point, name these floating objects found in the ocean which are composed
of frozen water and can cause shipwrecks such as the Titanic.

ANSWER: iceberg (prompt on "sea ice")

(28) The reproductive hectocotylus [[hek-toh-COT-ee-luss]] structure was first
discovered in one of these animals, which can pass their bodies through any opening large
enough to accommodate the rostrum. Possessing the highest brain-to-body mass ratio
among invertebrates, this animal's mimic species can imitate sea snakes and stingrays,
while its blue-ringed species is deadly to humans. Able to unscrew jars using its suction
cups, for the point, what is this cephalopod mollusk with eight arms?

ANSWER: Octopuses (accept Octopi)

(29) In 2004, the EU-manufactured Rosetta spacecraft made the first successful landing
on one of these objects. In 1994, one of these objects named Shoemaker-Levy 9 collided
with Jupiter, leaving temporary scars on the surface. The dirty-snowball theory describes
the composition of these objects, and solar wind makes the namesake tails of these objects
always point away from the sun. For the point, name these orbiting icy bodies, which
include ones named Halle-Bopp and Halley's.

ANSWER: comets
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                              Science Bee 1 - Finals


(30) Some isotopes of this element, when cooled below the lambda point, form the only
known superfluids. Named for the Greek personification of the sun, this element's nucleus is
equivalent to the alpha particle. After hydrogen, this element is the second most abundant
and lightest in the universe. For the point, name this lightest noble gas, which is often used
to inflate balloons.

ANSWER: helium
2020-21 Science Bee 1 - 2021-03-22                                             Science Bee 1 - Finals


Extra Question
(1)     After being given one of these body parts from a baboon, Baby Fae became the first
person to successfully receive a non-human transplant. An EKG measures the electrical
activity of this organ, and artificial pacemakers can be implanted to stabilize the rhythm of
this organ. Along with the lungs, a defibrillator and CPR are utilized when this organ stops
functioning. For the point, name this organ which pumps blood through the body.

ANSWER: heart
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                   Finals



                                               Finals
Regulation

(Tossup 1) This adjective describes the symmetry breaking that occurs in the Higgs mechanism. A
reaction can be described by this adjective if the Gibbs free energy is negative, indicating that the
conditions favor the formation of products and, thus, occurs without need of outside energy. For the point,
name this adjective which described the sudden “generation” of maggots on meat.
ANSWER: spontaneous

(Tossup 2) In 2007, for their gene-editing work on this model organism, Smithies, Evans, and Capecchi
won a Nobel Prize. This animal’s knockout variant comes from the species Mus Musculus. This group of
rodents is phenotypically characterized by tails longer than their bodies, a pointed nose, and rounded
ears. For the point, name this most commonly lab tested rodent, commonly mistaken for rats.
ANSWER: mice (or mouse; accept house mouse or house mice; prompt on “rodents”)


(Tossup 3) British analysts referred to a stream of data during this war as Fish, which was created by
the Lorenz cipher. At Bletchley Park during this war, a precursor to the computer named after Heath
Robinson was built to help crack the Enigma machine. Alan Turing contributed to British intelligence in
cracking Nazi code during, for the point, what war between Axis and Ally powers?
ANSWER: World War II (or WW2; or Second World War; prompt on “World War”)


(Tossup 4) A lysis reaction using this molecule splits alkenes into carboxylic acids and aldehydes. This
molecule’s concentration in the atmosphere is measured in Dobson units. Until they were banned by the
Montreal Protocol, chlorofluorocarbons decreased the concentration of this molecule, resulting in a hole
above Antarctica. For the point, name this molecule with chemical formula O3 that forms a namesake
layer in the atmosphere.
ANSWER: ozone (accept ozonolysis; accept ozone layer; accept O3 before mentioned, prompt
afterwards)


(Tossup 5) Imperfections in these devices can create spherical, coma, and chromatic aberrations. The
power of these devices is measured in diopters and can be found by taking the reciprocal of their focal
length. These devices come in concave and convex varieties and are usually made out of glass. For the
point, name these curved optical devices found in microscopes, telescopes, and glasses.
ANSWER: lenses


(Tossup 6) These constructs can be reduced to row-echelon form in a process named for Gauss and
Jordan. The characteristic polynomial of these constructs can be solved to find their eigenvalues. The
identity of these constructs has ones along the diagonal and zeros everywhere else. Cramer’s rule can be
used to find their determinant. For the point, name these constructs that arrange numbers into rows and
columns.
ANSWER: matrix (accept matrices; prompt on arrays)


                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                   Finals


(Tossup 7) It’s not temperature, but this quantity can be measured by a psychrometer [sai-CRAH-mah-
tur] which uses both a “dry bulb” and “wet bulb” thermometer. A psychrometer [sai-CRAH-mah-tur] is
a type of hygrometer [hai-GRAH-mah-tur], which is a class of instruments that measures this quantity.
This atmospheric measurement is actually “relative” since it indicates how close to saturation with water
vapor the air is. For the point, name this percentage measurement, which is low in places that experience
“dry heats.”
ANSWER: relative humidity (accept humid; accept water vapor concentration before “water vapor”
is mentioned prompt afterwards)


(Tossup 8) Christian de Nuve accidentally discovered this organelle by noticing enzyme activity dropped
when acid phosphatase was present. Tay Sachs disease is one of the many genetic storage diseases that
can affect this organelle due to its high amount of specialized hydrolytic enzymes. For the point, name
this organelle whose name refers to the fact it breaks down waste products.
ANSWER: lysosomes


(Tossup 9) A mission to retrieve macroscopic samples from this object named “Grunt” failed to find a
launch window out of Earth’s orbit. This is the larger and closer of two moons discovered in 1877 by
Asaph Hall, and it completes its orbit in 8 hours. This moon, home to the Stickney Crater, is named for
Ares’ son, the personification of fear. For the point, name this larger moon of Mars, paired with Deimos.
ANSWER: Phobos


(Tossup 10) He Jiankui unethically used CRISPR to edit two babies’ DNA in hopes of giving them
resistance to this disease. The HAART approach to treating this disease focuses on inhibiting multiple
targets, including the virus’s protease, integrase, and reverse transcriptase. For the point, name this
disease that became an epidemic in U.S. in the 1980s and is caused by the retrovirus HIV.
ANSWER: HIV/AIDS (or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; accept HIV or human
immunodeficiency virus before mentioned)


(Tossup 11) If a number x has this relationship to integers a and b, then there exists a linear combination
of a and b that equals x by Bezout’s identity. This type of number for two coprime numbers is always one.
The Euclidean algorithm is a simple way to compute this number given two integers. For the point, name
this largest integer that divides each of two or more given integers.
ANSWER: greatest common divisor (or gcd; accept greatest common factor or gcf )


(Tossup 12) The concentration of this compound in the atmosphere is plotted on the Keeling curve.
When this gas is dissolved, it forms the compound responsible for ocean acidification. Along with oxygen
gas, this is the only compound formed in a complete combustion. This compound is produced during
respiration. For the point, name this compound that is exhaled during breathing and whose formula is
CO2.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide (accept CO2 before mention)




                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                      Finals


(Tossup 13) A section of this surface known as the Endeavor Ridge is home to 150 feet tall black smokers
named Mothra and Godzilla. The measurement “mbsf” refers to “meters below” this location. This
general surface is where Benthivores feed and it is home to the creation of new crust due to its namesake
spreading. For the point, name this surface whose largest trench is named Mariana and is where groundfish
live.
ANSWER: Earth’s seabed (accept indications of ocean floor or sea floor)


(Tossup 14) This organ’s enterochromaffin-like cells produce histamine. G cells signal activation of
parietal cells to secrete a liquid into this organ that is neutralized by bicarbonate on leaving this organ.
This digestive organ sits between the esophagus and the duodenum. For the point, name this organ that
uses hydrochloric acid to break down food products into chyme for the small intestine.
ANSWER: stomach


(Tossup 15) This computer component uses registers to quickly access data. They can be overclocked
to yield additional performance. Parallel programming allows several of these components to work on a
problem at a time using multi-threading. Modern ones are “micro” and fit on a single integrated chip. For
the point, name this computer component that commonly goes by a three-letter abbreviation, responsible
for carrying out instructions.
ANSWER: central processor (accept central processing unit or CPU; accept microprocessor;
accept main processor)


(Tossup 16) This property names a class of thermoplastic polymers which are characterized by reversible
crosslinking. A coefficient of restitution equal to one characterizes processes with this property. This
property describes collisions where kinetic energy is conserved. Rubber bands are a canonical example of
objects with this property. For the point, give this term for an object that can return to its original state
after being stretched.
ANSWER: elastic collision (accept elastomer; accept perfectly elastic; accept elasticity)


(Tossup 17) A mixture of 96% of one of this type of compound and 4% water is notable because it
cannot be distilled. This class of compounds is characterized by the presence of a hydroxyl group. The
ethyl variety of this class of compounds is used as an additive in fuel and serves as the active ingredient in
many hand sanitizers. For the point, name this class of compounds whose “drinking” variety is ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols (prompt on “hydroxyl” before mentioned)


(Tossup 18) A large prehistoric remnant of one of these events in the San Bernardino Mountains is named
for Blackhawk Mountain. This form of mass wasting is divided into a starting zone, a track, and a run out
zone. Earthquakes in Nepal can cause these events on Mount Everest. For the point, name these events,
which pose a serious threat to mountain climbers, where snow and other debris hurtles down at high
velocities.
ANSWER: avalanches (accept rock avalanche; accept landslide; prompt on “mass wasting” before read)




                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                     Finals


(Tossup 19) This constellation is northwestward of the north star Sirius. This constellation contains the
stars Rigel and Betelgeuse [“beetlejuice”]. Mintaka, Alnilam, and Alnitak form a diagonal line to make up
this constellation’s “belt” while the namesake nebula of this constellation is located in the Sword asterism.
For the point, name this constellation of a hunter from Greek mythology.
ANSWER: Orion


(Tossup 20) This word is replaced with “quantum” in a system whose energy levels are spaced by
h-bar times omega. This adjective describes the motion exhibited by pendulums under the small angle
approximation. This adjective is paired with harmonic to describe systems which oscillate around a
fixed point. For the point, name this six-letter adjective that describes straightforward systems that lack
complexity.
ANSWER: simple (accept simple harmonic oscillator or simple harmonic motion; prompt on harmonic
before mentioned)


(Tossup 21) These three letters are paired with “op” for the abbreviated name of an “operational” circuit
device. A cyclic molecule containing adenosine is commonly referred to by “c” and these three letters.
These three letters begin the SI unit for current and name a device used by electric guitars. For the point,
name these three letters that begin a word that measures the distance from peak to trough [troff] of a
wave.
ANSWER: amps (accept spelling a-m-p; accept amplitude or Amperes or amplifiers; accept cyclic
AMP)


(Tossup 22) These cells are commonly counted with Wright’s stain. Neutrophils, monocytes, and
macrophages all fall under this class of cells. Antibodies are made by B and T cells, two members of this
class of blood cells. For the point, name this class of blood cells which regulate the immune system and
are contrasted with red blood cells.
ANSWER: white blood cells (or leukocytes; or WBCs; prompt on “blood cells”)


(Tossup 23) This scientist names a “deep field” and “ultra deep field” observed in a small section of Ursa
Major. In 1929, this scientist noticed galaxies appear to expand away from us in every direction, and that
redshift increases as a function of distance. For the point, name this scientist who names a space telescope
launched in 1990 and a law describing the expansion of the universe.
ANSWER: Edwin (Powell) Hubble


(Tossup 24) This medicine can increase a child’s risk for Reye’s syndrome. This nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug has a precursor that was extracted from willow tree bark. In 1899, Bayer gave the
common trade name to this salicylate that reduces the risk of stroke and heart attack. For the point,
name this anti-inflammatory drug that is often used to treat pain, fever, and headaches.
ANSWER: aspirin (accept acetyl-salicylic acid)




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                     Finals


(Tossup 25) The sulfurs in two cysteine residues can form this type of structure in protein folding. Direct
overlap between orbitals creates the sigma type of this structure. Four dots between two atoms in Lewis
dot notation represents this sort of bond. Carbon can make four bonds of this type. In this type of bond,
electron pairs are shared between two atoms. For the point, name this type of bond contrasted with ionic
bonds.
ANSWER: covalent bond (accept molecular bond; accept covalence; accept disulfide bond; prompt
on bond)


(Tossup 26) This particle, which comes in “thermal” and “fast” varieties, is the only particle to date
observed to undergo beta decay. This particle can be slowed down using moderators in a reactor. Two
down quarks and one up quark makeup this particle. Adding this particle to an element creates an isotope
of that element. For the point, name this particle that makes up the atomic nucleus with protons.
ANSWER: neutrons


(Tossup 27) Cycloheximide can inhibit this structure’s translocation responsibility. This structure is
confusingly referred to as an organelle in some scientific literature despite being present in prokaryotes
and not possessing a membrane. This structure gives the rough endoplasmic reticulum its namesake
characteristic. For the point, name this RNA-protein structure responsible for carrying out translation.
ANSWER: ribosomes


(Tossup 28) Altitude lowers the temperature needed for this process to occur due to decreasing vapor
pressure. Adding salt to water increases the temperature needed for this process to occur. This process
occurs at high temperatures for water due to hydrogen bonding, typically at 212 degrees Fahrenheit or
100 degrees Celsius. For the point, name this rapid vaporization, a phase transition from a liquid to gas.
ANSWER: boiling (accept boiling point; prompt on “vaporization”)


(Tossup 29) This material is studied in edaphology and pedology. The texture of the layers of this
material are classified into horizons. Mycorrhizal [my-CUH-rai-zuhl] fungi live in this material. This mix
of clay, sand, and humus sits on top of bedrock. Crop rotation helps preserve the fertility of this material.
For the point, name this material that earthworms help improve and is commonly referred to as dirt.
ANSWER: soil (accept dirt until mentioned, prompt afterwards; accept earth until “earthworms”
prompt afterwards)


(Tossup 30) Hero of Alexandria developed an early precursor to this machine known as the aeolipile.
The Rankine cycle was developed to analyze this machine’s efficiency of creating pressure to move a
piston. This machine was improved by James Watt by recycling the namesake vapor to a new vessel
for condensation. For the point, name this machine that powered many factories during the industrial
revolution.
ANSWER: steam engine (accept steam turbine; prompt on “engine” or “turbine” with “powered by
what?”)




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                    Finals


Extra

(Tossup 31) Colloids containing nanoparticles of this element are produced in the Turkevich method.
Alchemists used aqua regia to dissolve platinum and this element Rutherford discovered the nucleus while
firing alpha particles at a foil of this element. Because of its malleability, this element is commonly used
in jewelry. For the point, name this precious metal with atomic number seventy-nine and chemical symbol
Au.
ANSWER: gold (accept aurum; prompt on “Au”)

(Tossup 32) In 2014, scientists identified a densovirus targeting organisms in this class causing a namesake
wasting disease. The “crown of thorns” member of this class poses a threat to coral reef systems. These
echinoderms are apart of the class Asteroidea. For the point, name this sea-dwelling creature whose five
tentacles lend it its astronomical name.
ANSWER: starfish (or starfishes; accept sea stars; accept Asteroidea before mentioned)




                                                  Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                             Round 1



                                            Round 1
Regulation

(Tossup 1) These bodies are home to a habitat that comes in fringing, barrier, and atoll types. Species
denser than these bodies that rest on their bottom live in the benthic zone. Nutrients in these bodies of
water are provided by cold seeps, hydrothermal vents, marine snow, or whale falls. For the point, name
these bodies of water, which include the Arctic, Atlantic, and Pacific.
ANSWER: ocean (accept sea until “Arctic”; prompt on coral “reef” with “Where are reefs located?”)

(Tossup 2) Definitions of these substances include electron pair acceptor and hydrogen donor. Depending
on whether they lose all of their protons in water, these substances can be classified as either strong or
weak. These substances name a type of rain often caused by pollution. These substances have a pH less
than seven and are often sour tasting. Vinegar and lemon juice are, For the point, what substances that
are often corrosive?
ANSWER: acids


(Tossup 3) CalTech alumni and faculty help run this agency’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. This agency
has been responsible for exploring Gale crater with a machine whose name was proposed by sixth-grader
Clara Ma. This agency’s Orion craft will launch the second Artemis mission in 2022. For the point, name
this American space agency that landed Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong on the moon.
ANSWER: NASA (or the National Aeronautics and Space Administration)


(Tossup 4) A scientist with this surname names a temperature above which ferromagnetism disappears.
Two scientists with this surname discovered the element polonium. A woman with this surname studied
at the Flying University, an underground educational institution in Poland. For her work, she won two
Nobel prizes, and she coined the term radioactivity. For the point, name this last name of physicists Pierre
and Marie.
ANSWER: Curie


(Tossup 5) An “Integrated” technique to designing these devices is based on silicon semiconductor
substrates and handles billions of transistors. Kirchoff names a “loop” and “junction” law governing the
behavior of these devices. “Voltage equals current times resistance” is a statement of Ohm’s law which
governs these devices. For the point, name these devices consisting of components that allow electricity to
flow.
ANSWER: electronic circuits (accept integrated circuits or prompt on “board”s or “breadboard”s)


(Tossup 6) A characteristic named for this mathematician is determined by the number of vertices minus
the number of edges plus the number of faces. This mathematician set the foundation for graph theory by
observing the bridges of Seven Bridges of Königsberg. His namesake constant is approximately 2.718 and
is represented with an e. For the point, name this prolific Swiss mathematician and physicist.
ANSWER: Leonhard Euler


                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                Round 1


(Tossup 7) These three letters begin the last word in an astronomy term for high luminosity regions
whose other two words are “active” and “galactic.” Scientific names beginning with these three letters
typically derive from the latin word for a pit or seeds inside a fruit. For the point, name these three letters
that begin the name of a central organelle ending with “leus” [lee-us].
ANSWER: nuc


(Tossup 8) In these structures, fast flowing deposits of calcite is often affectionately referred to as these
structures’ “bacon.” Troglobites dwell in these Karst topographical structures which are formed from
dissolution of rocks. Stalactites hang from the ceiling of these structures. For the point, name these
structures underground networks with surface entrances that serve as a hibernation spot for bats and
bears.
ANSWER: caves (accept sinkholes until mentioned; prompt on “hole”s)


(Tossup 9) The probability of encountering these entities is encoded in the Drake equation. The Fermi
paradox arises from the high probability of these entities existing though none have been discovered. For
these entities to exist, it is thought they have to arise in a star system on a planet with water that sits
within the goldilock zone. For the point, name this theoretical type of life that exists on planets other
than our own.
ANSWER: extraterrestrial(s) life(forms) (or aliens; accept obvious equivalents)


(Tossup 10) Two charged particles undergoing this sort of event can cause a form of radiation called
bremsstrahlung. Kinetic energy isn’t conserved in inelastic examples of this event between two carts.
Momentum is conserved for the two cart system under both elastic and inelastic examples of this event.
For the point, name this event where two objects come in contact and exchange force.
ANSWER: collisions (or colliding)


(Tossup 11) Dmitry Belyayev ran an experiment that showed that these animals could be selected to
show affection to humans; that experiment resulted in the first successful taming of the silver variety
of these animals. It’s not dogs, but this genus of Canidae’s [CAN-uh-DAY-ees] most common variety is
referred to as red [this animal], due to the color of its fur. For the point, name these animals whose true
variety is classified as Vulpes.
ANSWER: foxes (accept Vuples before mentioned)


(Tossup 12) Mulliken’s scale of this property takes the average of the electron affinity and the first
ionization energy. Differences in this property determine whether a bond is ionic, polar covalent, or
nonpolar covalent. A common scale for measuring this property is named for Pauling. Fluorine has the
highest value of, for the point, what property, the tendency of atoms to attract electrons?
ANSWER: electronegativity




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Round 1


(Tossup 13) Repeatedly undergoing this process results in the shortening of telomeres. A checkpoint in
this process ensures kinetochores are attached to spindle fibers. Cytokinesis shortly follows this process,
which occurs after the G2 phase and is abbreviated M. The phases of this process include prophase,
anaphase, and telophase. For the point, name this asexual division of a cell that produces two identical
daughter cells.
ANSWER: mitosis (prompt on “M” phase until mentioned; prompt on “cell division; do NOT accept or
prompt on meiosis)


(Tossup 14) The kernmantle type of this material has a core of high tensile strength surrounded by
an abrasive-resistant outer layer. The “dynamic” type of this material is stretchable giving it use in
mountaineering and rock climbing. For the point, name this type of material made up of fibers like yarn
or string twisted or weaved together to create tensile strength for pulling.
ANSWER: ropes (prompt on “chord”)


(Tossup 15) Two drugs to treat this condition measured on the Hamilton-Norwood scale are Minoxidil
[muh-NOX-uh-dill] and Finasteride [FIN-uh-STARE-uh-dee]. Alopecia [al-OH-pay-shee-uh] is the scientific
name for this condition treated with brands like Propecia and Rogaine, as well as follicular implants. This
condition’s “male-patterned” form happens for around 50% of men. For the point, name this irreversible
hair shedding process.
ANSWER: balding (accept alopecia before mentioned; prompt on “hair loss”)


(Tossup 16) A historical one of these events at lapilli-layered excavation site Regio V was where a
skeleton was found crushed under a giant rock. The underrepresented dangers from these events are a
Javanese-named destructive mudflow called lahar and fast moving hot gas and tephra known as pyroclastic
flow. For the point, name these catastrophic events where volcanoes spew up lava and fast flowing debris
into the air.
ANSWER: volcanic eruptions (accept eruption of Mount Vesuvius)


(Tossup 17) The work done by a gas is proportional to the change in this quantity when pressure is
held constant. This quantity is measured off a burette during titration. The number of moles divided by
concentration equals this quantity. This quantity is reported in liters for liquids. For the point, name this
quantity measured in cubic meters, the amount of space occupied by an object.
ANSWER: volume (accept liters until mentioned, prompt afterwards)


(Tossup 18) Members of the Variola genus were the origin of this disease. British soldiers once used
blankets infected with this disease as weapons. The first treatment for this disease involved inoculation
with a similar disease affecting cows. Edward Jenner created the first vaccine for this disease. For the
point, name this deadly pox disease eradicated in 1980.
ANSWER: smallpox




                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                             Round 1


(Tossup 19) Family types of these objects include clusters, clumps and tribes. The Canadian Space
Agency launched the microsatellite NEOSSat to detect these objects. The Kirkwood Gaps are so named
for gaps in the distribution of these objects. Large examples of these objects include ones named Pallas
and Ceres. For the point, name these planetoid objects that form a namesake belt between Mars and
Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroids


(Tossup 20) The nitrate of this element was used to develop early photographs. This element has the
highest thermal and electrical conductivity of any metal and is the lighter of the two elements in electrum.
The adjective “sterling” denotes an alloy that is composed of 92.5% of this metal. For the point, give this
element with atomic number forty-seven and chemical symbol Ag.
ANSWER: silver (prompt on Ag before mention)


(Tossup 21) This molecule’s blood levels are regulated by Insulin and glucagon. This molecule is
chemically identical to dextrose. The disaccharide sucrose is made up of fructose and this other sugar
molecule. This six-carbon sugar is the most common metabolic start point for cellular respiration. For the
point, name this sugar broken down at the beginning of glycolysis.
ANSWER: glucose (prompt on “C6H12O6”)


(Tossup 22) Some scientists originally hypothesized this class of planets could only form outside the frost
line, a position disproved with the discovery of “hot” ones named after a planet in our Solar System. This
class of planets is named for its abundance of hydrogen and helium, unlike a similar “ice giant” which
have heavier elements. For the point, name this class of giants that includes Jupiter and Saturn named
after their most abundant phase of matter.
ANSWER: gas giants (accept just gas after “giant” has been read; accept hot Jupiter until Jupiter is
read; prompt on “giant”; do NOT accept or prompt on “Ice giant”)


(Tossup 23) They’re not integers, but an early example of Cantor’s pairing function was used to prove
the countability of this set of numbers. Using a proof by contradiction, Hippasus proved that the square
root of two was not a member of this set. This subset of the reals are represented by a capital Q. For the
point, name this set of numbers that can be expressed as the ratio of two integers, unlike irrationals.
ANSWER: rational numbers (accept Q before mention)


(Tossup 24) Hodgkin and Huxley developed a model of these cells after experimenting with a Giant squid
one. Santiago Ramon y Cajal [ee caHAL] determined the doctrine of these cells; that they communicate
at synapses, which was later discovered to be done using neurotransmitters. These cells communicate
through action potentials that they send down their axons and receive at their dendrites. For the point,
name this type of nervous tissue cell found in the brain.
ANSWER: neurons (prompt on “axon” before mentioned)




                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                Round 1


(Tossup 25) Events in this period are the subject of Stephen Jay Gould’s theory of contingency. Many
important fossils from this period were discovered at the Burgess Shale by Charles Walcott. This period
was preceded by the Ediacaran and succeeded by the Ordovician. Trilobites and mollusks first appeared
during this period. For the point, name this first geological period of the Paleozoic Era, which names an
explosion in biodiversity.
ANSWER: Cambrian period


(Tossup 26) Along with chromium, this is the only period four element to violate the Aufbau principle.
This element sits to the right of the ferromagnetic elements. The sulfate salt of this element is usually
attached to five water molecules and is a deep blue color. When combined with tin, this element forms the
alloy bronze. For the point, name this transition metal with atomic twenty-nine and chemical symbol Cu.
ANSWER: copper (prompt on Cu before mentioned)


(Tossup 27) Paul Boyer developed the flip-flop mechanism of this molecule’s production via gamma
subunit rotation This molecule is primarily produced by establishing a proton concentration gradient
followed by oxidative phosphorylation in its namesake synthase. This molecule is invested at the beginning
of glycolysis. For the point, name this energy currency of the cell which has three phosphate groups.
ANSWER: ATP (accept adenosine triphosphate; accept ATP synthase)


(Tossup 28) The energy of one of these particles must surpass the work function to eject an electron.
Albert Einstein won his Nobel Prize in physics for his use of this particle to explain an effect where electron
emission occurred due to these particles hitting a metal. This particle mediates the electromagnetic force.
For the point, name this massless particle which carries the phenomenon of light.
ANSWER: photons


(Tossup 29) Lindlar names a compound of this type that is “poisoned.” A convertor named for this class
of compounds reduces the toxicity exhaust gases in a vehicle. They are heterogenous in a different phase
than the reaction. This class of compounds lower a reaction’s activation energy, but are not themselves
consumed in the reaction. For the point, this class of compounds that accelerate the speed of a reaction.
ANSWER: catalysts


(Tossup 30) Being able to only use four of these without having two nodes have the same one names a
planar graph theorem that was the first computer-assisted proof. The brain only uses three types of cone
cells to perceive this phenomenon. A dispersive prism splits a monochromatic beam of light into these
phenomena. For the point, name this quality of a substance which is encoded by the wavelength of visible
light, such as red or blue.
ANSWER: colors (accept chromatism or chromatic until “monochromatic” prompt afterwards)




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                          Round 1


Extra

(Tossup 31) This device was made possible with the invention of cavity magnetrons and was first marketed
as the Radarange. According to legend, Percy Spencer invented this device after realizing the magnetron
had melted a candy bar in his pocket and was able to later use it to pop popcorn. For the point, name
this type of electric oven that uses the namesake form of radiation to heat up food.
ANSWER: microwave oven (accept microwaves; prompt on “oven”)

(Tossup 32) Efforts to weaken these events include an attempt to do so with silver iodide in Project
Stormfury. Major category 5 occurrences of these events as measured on the Saffir-Simpson scale include
Kenna and Patricia. The division of the National Weather Service that monitors these events is located in
Miami. Primarily hitting countries in the Caribbean Sea and states like Florida are, for the point, what
tropical cyclones that occur in the Atlantic Ocean?
ANSWER: hurricanes (accept tropical cyclone until mentioned, prompt afterwards; prompt on
typhoon with “What is that event called when it occurs in the Atlantic Ocean?”)




                                                 Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                  Round 1



                                            Round 1
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Complications with this organ are typically seen in patients presenting Levine’s sign.
Bachman’s bundles and Purkinje fibers depolarize this organ. This organ produces the signal for the QRS
complex on an EKG. This organ is divided into four chambers known as atria and ventricles. For the
point, name this cardiovascular organ that pumps blood through the body.
ANSWER: heart

(Tossup 2) For a wire, this quantity varies inversely with cross-sectional area and directly with length.
The inverse of this quantity is measured in siemens [SEE-mens] and is called conductance. The ideal
circuit component related to this quantity is represented by a zigzag on a circuit diagram. This quantity
is measured in ohms. For the point, name this quantity that describes how much a device opposes electric
flow.
ANSWER: electrical resistance (accept resistor; do not accept “resistivity”)


(Tossup 3) One collection of these features gives its name to the Jurassic period. The process of folding in
the crust can create these features. Varieties of these landforms include fold, block, and volcanic. Orogeny
refers to the creation of a new range of these geographical landmasses due to uplift of tectonic plates. For
the point, name this type of landmass, examples of which include Kilimanjaro and Everest.
ANSWER: mountains (or mountain range; accept Jura mountains or Jura mountain range; prompt
on “Jura”)


(Tossup 4) This function is generalized by the gamma function. Stirling’s formula is an approximation of
this function. This function applied to a positive integer n is given by n times quantity n minus one all
the way down to one. This function gives the number of ways to arrange n distinct objects in a row. For
the point, name this function symbolized by an exclamation point next to a number.
ANSWER: factorial (prompt on “exclamation” point)


(Tossup 5) This man invented the phonograph and an early projector known as the kinetoscope. This
man controversially organized the killing of the elephant Topsy. This rival of George Westinghouse once
employed Nikola Tesla at his Machine Works company. This “Wizard of Menlo Park” found a practical
use for carbon filament that would later be replaced with tungsten. For the point, name this American
inventor of the lightbulb.
ANSWER: Thomas Alva Edison


(Tossup 6) By chemical mass, this is the heaviest element in the only diprotic strong acid. When bonded
to six fluorine atoms, this element forms a potent greenhouse gas. Two atoms of this element form a
covalent “bridge” in proteins. This element sits below oxygen on the periodic table. For the point, name
this element, associated with brimstone and bad smells, with chemical symbol S.
ANSWER: sulfur (accept sulfuric acid; accept disulfide bonds; prompt on S)


                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                  Round 1


(Tossup 7) The fixed action patterns of aggression in some of these animals were studied by Niko
Tinbergen. One of these vertebrates was first cloned by George Streisinger. These non-mammals include
the stickleback and one named for its zebra pattern along its scales. For the point, name these water-
breathing animals that include trout and salmon.
ANSWER: fish (accept Stickleback and Zebrafish before mentioned)


(Tossup 8) This theory can help explain adaptive radiation as the filling of various niches. This theory was
formulated in part from observations of finches on the Galapagos Islands. The formulator of this theory
referred to it as “descent with modification” and outlined his discoveries in On the Origin of Species.
Natural selection is an important mechanism in this theory. For the point, name this theory formulated
by Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: evolution (accept natural selection until mentioned; prompt afterwards)


(Tossup 9) This property’s indentation form is measured on the Rockwell scale and the Vickers scale,
which presses into a material with a diamond indenter. Apatite has a value of 5 for this property while
Talc has a value of 1. This property is defined as a mineral’s resistance to scratching. Diamond has the
highest natural value of, for the point, what property measured by the Mohs scale?
ANSWER: (Mohs) hardness (accept indentation hardness; accept Vickers hardness; accept Rockwell
hardness)


(Tossup 10) An equation described by this law is modified with a and b constants to create the van der
Waals equation. This law only applies under the assumptions of kinetic molecular theory. The equation
described by this law can be derived through a combination of Boyle’s law, Charles’ law, and Gay-Lussac’s
law. For the point, name this law which relates the product of pressure and volume of an ideal substance
to its temperature.
ANSWER: ideal gas law (accept gas law after “ideal”; accept PV equals nRT; accept PV equals
NkT; accept equivalent expression)


(Tossup 11) According to the first law of thermodynamics, heat minus work equals the change in the
“internal” form of this quantity. One form of this quantity is equal to one-half m v squared where m is
mass and v is velocity. This quantity is typically defined as a measure of “the ability to do work” and can
be divided into kinetic and potential components. For the point, name this quantity whose SI unit is the
Joule.
ANSWER: energy (accept potential energy; accept kinetic energy; accept internal energy; accept
change in internal energy)


(Tossup 12) These objects can be placed into three principal categories based on work by Luke Howard,
who developed the common Latin nomenclature used to describe them. Types of these objects include
lenticular, nacreous, and contrails. Common classifications include cirrus, stratus, or cumulus. For the
point, name these puffs of air and water vapor which form in the sky
ANSWER: clouds



                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                  Round 1


(Tossup 13) An experiment using this organism compared the ratio of nitrogen 14 and nitrogen 15 in DNA.
This organism was used by Meselson and Stahl to show that DNA replication was semi-conservative. This
organism is infected by lambda phage. Outbreaks of this bacteria are usually caused by the O157:H7 strain.
For the point, name this rod-shaped gut-residing bacteria from the Escherichia [ES-cah-REE-chee-uh]
genus.
ANSWER: E. coli (accept Escherichia coli; accept just coli at the end)


(Tossup 14) The area of the sky obscured by this object is dubbed the “zone of avoidance.” Harlow
Shapley believed this object was the only one of its kind to exist, a theory overturned in debates with
Heber Doust Curtis using Hubble’s evidence of this galaxy’s neighbor, Andromeda. This galaxy is home
to a black hole at its center called Sagittarius A* [A star]. For the point, name this galaxy which contains
our solar system.
ANSWER: Milky Way (prompt on descriptions of “our galaxy”)


(Tossup 15) The wurtzite [vurt-SITE] form of this element’s nitride is harder than diamond. Oxygen,
silicon, and this element are the three most common in Pyrex glass. This element commonly only makes
three valence bonds, violating the octet rule. This element is the lightest metalloid on the periodic table,
found just to the left of carbon. For the point, name this element with atomic number five and elemental
symbol B.
ANSWER: boron (accept borosilicates; prompt on B)


(Tossup 16) One of these things named for Poisson can model events that occur with a fixed rate. The
central limit theorem details how independent random variables can tend to one of these things that is
described by the 68-95-99.7 rule. That example of these statistical things is sometimes named for Gauss
and has a bell curve shape. For the point, name this statistical device which can be uniform or normal
and describes the spread of data.
ANSWER: probability distribution (accept Poisson distribution; accept normal distribution; accept
Gauss(ian) distribution)


(Tossup 17) After obtaining the product of this task, concentrating is done to remove gangue [gang]. This
task has open pit, strip, and underground varieties. An effective method of cracking rock for this task
was fire-setting, which was Alfred Nobel’s reason for inventing dynamite. For the point, name this task of
extracting valuable material from the Earth, such as coal, diamonds, and various ores.
ANSWER: mining (accept mines; accept extracting ores or extraction; accept descriptions of
obtaining minerals)


(Tossup 18) A reaction for creating soap uses this class of molecules along with esters. Sodium hydride is
a “super” example of this class of molecules. Lewis variants are ones that donate electron pairs. Common
examples include the weak one, ammonia, and sodium hydroxide. For the point, name this class of
molecules with pH greater than seven which can be neutralized with acids.
ANSWER: bases (accept word forms like basic)



                                                  Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                  Round 1


(Tossup 19) This organelle is the site of the Q cycle named for Coenzyme Q10. When cytochrome c is
released from this organelle, apoptosis is initiated in the cell. This organelle’s matrix is separated from
the intermembrane space by folds called cristae, which increase surface area for the electron transport
chain. For the point, name this primary factory of ATP synthesis that is affectionately known as the
“powerhouse of the cell.”
ANSWER: mitochondria (accept mitochondrion)


(Tossup 20) This object’s Reiner Gamma exemplifies its namesake swirls. Studies of this object by George
Darwin led him to propose the Giant-impact hypothesis of its formation. Hot lava regions that cooled into
flat dark spots created the mares on this object, such as the Sea of Tranquility. This object has waxing
and waning gibbous phases. For the point, name this object which orbits the Earth in approximately 27
days.
ANSWER: the moon (or luna)


(Tossup 21) The name for this sort of process is thought to be from an Anglicization of an Arab
mathematician who invented a form of algebra. These processes typically have their asymptotic
performance expressed using “big O” notation. Djikstra [DIKE-struh] names one of these instructions
that finds the shortest path between two vertices of a graph. Quicksort is an example of one for sorting.
For the point, name this set of cookie-cutter instructions given to a computer to solve a problem.
ANSWER: algorithms (al-Kwarizmi is the Arab mathematician)


(Tossup 22) Erta Ale in Ethiopia is home to a lake filled with this substance. Domes named for this
substance occur when it piles up near the vent due to slow movement through the conduit. This substance
comes in pahoehoe [pah-ho-ay ho-ay] and aa [ah ah] varieties. This substance cools to form extrusive rocks
like pumice and is emitted along with tephra. If this substance cools fast enough, it forms the glassy rock
obsidian. For the point, name this hot fluid ejected from a volcano.
ANSWER: lava (accept lava lakes; accept lava domes)


(Tossup 23) ECMA can add functional groups to one member of this class of compounds. Wallace
Carothers names an equation that describes the degree to which the formation of this class of compounds
occurs. Cross-links can form between chains of this class of compounds which include plastics like Teflon.
Nylon is a synthetic member of, for the point, what class of compounds made up of repeating monomers?
ANSWER: polymers (accept acrylics or acrylic polymers; accept synthetic polymers; accept plastics
until mentioned)


(Tossup 24) Just below the upper surface of this structure is the palisade layer, which typically lies above
the spongy layer. A waxy cuticle minimizes water loss from this structure. This structure contains tiny
holes for gas exchange called stomata. This plant organ is specialized for photosynthesis and contains
chlorophyll, which makes it green. For the point, name this plant structure that changes color and falls off
trees in autumn.
ANSWER: leaf (accept leaves or leaf age; accept foliage)



                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                Round 1


(Tossup 25) Two linear partial differential equations named for this device describe the change in voltage
and current during transmission. Charles Wheatstone and W.F. Cooke created an early version of the
needle system for this device. The single-wire version of this device was invented by Samuel Morse. For
the point, name this early form of long-distance transmission of messages whose name is Greek for “far off
writing.”
ANSWER: electric telegraph (accept telegrapher’s equations; accept telegraph equations; accept
telegraphy)


(Tossup 26) According to Goldbach’s conjecture, all integers with this property can be written as the
sum of two primes. Functions described by this term are symmetric about the y-axis. Performing an
exponential on a negative real number with a natural number that has this property is always positive.
The smallest prime number is the only prime with this property. For the point, name this property present
in numbers divisible by two.
ANSWER: even (prompt on descriptions like divisible by two until mentioned)


(Tossup 27) James Challis blundered the chance to find this object using John Couch Adams’s
calculations. Johann Gottfried Galle discovered this planet based on calculations done by Urbain Le
Verrier [luh VARE-ee-AY]. This planet is orbited by the largest retrograde moon in the Solar System,
Triton. Methane in this planet’s atmosphere reflects gives it its namesake blue color. For the point, name
farthest planet in our Solar System, the eighth from the Sun.
ANSWER: Neptune


(Tossup 28) This material’s hachimoji variant has enhanced storage capability. This material can be cut
using cas9. Topoisomerase corrects for supercoiling in this material. Its namesake polymerase attaches
after helicase unzips it. This material is wrapped around histones in chromosomes. It is made up of
four bases – adenine, thymine, cytosine and guanine. For the point, name this genetic material which is
transcribed into RNA.
ANSWER: DNA (accept deoxyribonucleic acid)


(Tossup 29) This unit was recently redefined through measurements of Planck’s constant, until then this
was the only SI unit defined by a physical device. The standard units for moment of inertia are derived
by multiplying this unit by meters squared. Balances measure this SI unit, typically by one thousandths
of it. For the point, name this SI unit for mass approximately equal to 2.2 pounds.
ANSWER: kilogram (do NOT accept or prompt on gram)


(Tossup 30) Hennig Brand discovered this element while attempting to turn his urine into gold. Match
factory workers developed jaw deformation due to prolonged exposure to this element’s white allotrope.
This element names a form of radiation that is not immediately re-emitted, contrasted with fluorescence.
For the point, name this element with atomic number 15 and atomic symbol P.
ANSWER: phosphorus (accept white phosphorus; prompt on P until mentioned)




                                                 Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                Round 1


Extra

(Tossup 31) In languages like C++, this sort of data structure is similar to an array but has dynamic
size. In linear algebra, this word describes mathematical objects that can be manipulated with dot and
cross products. In biology, this term refers to organisms which carry and transmit disease. Velocity can
be described by this term, unlike speed, which is scalar. For the point, name this term which can describe
mathematical objects with magnitude and direction.
ANSWER: vectors




                                                 Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                               Finals



                                               Finals
Regulation

(Tossup 1) This organelle is the site of O-linked glycosylation. COP I and COP II assist in the transport
between the endoplasmic reticulum and this organelle. This organelle has flattened membranes called
cisternae. For the point, name this organelle named after an Italian scientist responsible for packaging
proteins and sending them to their destination.
ANSWER: Golgi Apparatus (or Golgi body)

(Tossup 2) The first MASER was created by Charles H. Townes using this compound. This compound is
converted to nitric acid in the Ostwald process. One process for synthesizing this compound typically uses
an iron catalyst and is the Bosch-Haber process. This simple 4 element compound is used as a fertilizer.
FTP name this compound with formula NH3.
ANSWER: ammonia (accept NH3 before mention)


(Tossup 3) A prehistoric large example of one of these bodies was Agassiz. Isle Royale on one of these
bodies of water was used to study wolf populations. The kettle type of these bodies can be formed by
retreating glaciers. Erosion can create U-shaped examples of these bodies called Oxbow. For the point,
name these large, closed bodies of water that include Michigan and Superior.
ANSWER: lake (accept Lake Superior after “Isle Royale”)


(Tossup 4) In order to work around the existence of this type of matter, Mordehai Milgrom developed
Modified Newtonian Dynamics. The Lambda CDM model formulates this type of matter as “cold.” The
fact galaxies spin faster than expected given severe underestimates of their mass from calculations led to
the formulation of this theorized state of matter. For the point, name this form of matter named for being
undetectable by light.
ANSWER: dark matter


(Tossup 5) The rotational analog of this quantity is torque, while this quantity over a given area is called
pressure. This quantity can be balanced and analyzed using Free-Body diagrams. The amount of this
quantity caused by gravity is called weight, and the net amount of this quantity on a body is equal to its
mass times its acceleration. For the point, name this quantity measured in Newtons.
ANSWER: force


(Tossup 6) The dynamics of a spherical one in an incompressible infinite fluid is encoded in the
Rayleigh-Plesset equation. According to legend, Donald Glaser got the idea for a chamber of these things
to detect particles from watching them foam at the top of a beer glass. They hold together due to surface
tension balancing the pressure which can cause them to pop. For the point, name these pockets of air
trapped in a liquid.
ANSWER: bubbles



                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                 Finals


(Tossup 7) In order to provide ventilation for these structures, Cresson Kearny designed an efficient air
pump. “Earthquake bombs” were designed as a “buster” to these structures. They’re not block houses,
but World War II and the Cold War saw extensive building of these civilian structures, the latter for fear
of nuclear fall out. For the point, name these fortified shelters designed to protect people from bombs,
nuclear weapons, and enemy attacks.
ANSWER: bunker (prompt on “shelter” until mentioned)


(Tossup 8) For a crystalline structure made up of these types of bonds, the enthalpy change can be
calculated from the lattice energy using the Born-Haber cycle. This type of bond most readily occurs
between weakly electronegative atoms and strongly electronegative atoms like alkali metals and halogens.
For the point, name this type of bond, typically stronger than a covalent bond, where one atom completely
gives up an electron to the other.
ANSWER: ionic bonds


(Tossup 9) Along with Jordan, this mathematician names a form of elimination to solve linear equations
in matrix form. This mathematician showed a heptadecagon is constructible using a compass and
straightedge. According to legend, as a child he summed the numbers one to one hundred much faster
than his teacher had anticipated. For the point, name this German mathematician and physicist who
names the normal distribution.
ANSWER: Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss


(Tossup 10) Two varieties of this type of cloud are calvus and capillatus. This is the larger of two clouds
that can form a flanking line. This type of cloud is the progression from cumulus congestus clouds due to
continued powerful upward air currents carrying water vapor with it. For the point, name these “heaped
rainstorm” clouds that are abbreviated Cb and are typically larger than cumulus clouds.
ANSWER: cumulonimbus (do NOT accept or prompt on “cumulus” or “nimbus” alone)


(Tossup 11) Placing several of this type of circuit on a single chip gives the chip “multiple-cores.” Assembly
language instructions tell this type of circuit how to behave which it receives from the compilation of
code written in a high-level programming language. For the point, name these computer chips commonly
abbreviated CPU, which carry out instructions on the computer.
ANSWER: processor (accept microprocessor; accept Central Processing Unit; accept CPU before
mentioned)


(Tossup 12) For this disease, Merck announced an EPOCH study to test the beta-secretase 1 inhibitor
Verubecestat; the study proved ineffective at lowering neurofibrillary tangles due to hyperphosphorylated
tau proteins or at lowering beta-amyloid plaque levels – both of which are features present in the brains
of patients suffering from, for the point, what neurodegenerative disease which accounts for around 70%
of dementia cases?
ANSWER: Alzheimer’s disease




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                 Finals


(Tossup 13) This most common source for this element is the ore sphalerite.This element and copper
were stacked together to make the battery precursor, the Voltaic pile. This element names a transcription
factor “finger” motif. In galvanization, this element coats a metal surface to prevent rusting. For the point,
name this element with atomic number thirty and chemical symbol Zn.
ANSWER: zinc (prompt on Zn before mentioned)


(Tossup 14) This motion is described by the third Euler [OY-ler] angle. The pitch, yaw, and roll of an
airplane give the three principle variants of this motion. While undergoing this kind of motion, an object
can begin to exhibit nutation and precession. Angular acceleration describes how fast this motion speeds
up or slows down. For the point, name this kind of motion where an object goes about one of its axes,
exemplified by toy tops.
ANSWER: rotation (accept word forms like rotate or rotating; accept spinning; accept turning;
accept synonyms like revolving or whirling or circling)


(Tossup 15) This organ’s Merkel cells are a type of oval-shaped mechanoreceptor. Keratinocytes are
an important component of this organ. This largest organ of the body is the first line of defense of the
immune system and is the main synthesis site of vitamin D due to a reaction with sunlight. For the point,
name this organ made up of the dermis, that covers the human body.
ANSWER: skin


(Tossup 16) Predictions for the formula of this substance have included quicklime, because it ignites on
contact with water. The Byzantines used this substance, often by launching it from ships, until its formula
was lost in the 1200s. For the point, name this ancient weapon that is said to be similar to modern napalm
because it can burn while floating on water.
ANSWER: Greek fire (prompt on “fire;” prompt on “wet fire” and similar)


(Tossup 17) This planet’s northern hemisphere exhibits storms called the Great White Spot. Gaps named
for Maxwell and Huygens are present in a system nearby this planet. This planet’s moon Enceladus is
known for its high albedo. The probe Cassini explored this planet, whose largest moon is Titan. For the
point, name his sixth planet from the sun, known for its large ring system.
ANSWER: Saturn


(Tossup 18) In the Davisson-Germer experiment, electrons fired at this element displayed a diffraction
pattern. This element is purified using synthetic gas in the Mond process. Raney names a catalyst of this
metal that exists in the Earth’s core with iron. This metal sits between cobalt and copper on the periodic
table. For the point, name this metal with atomic number twenty-eight and chemical symbol Ni.
ANSWER: nickel (prompt on Ni before mentioned)




                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                Finals


(Tossup 19) A close neighbor to this organism is teosinte [tee-oh-SIN-tay]. Barbara McClintock won the
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering transposons, or “jumping genes,” in this model
organism. The primary production of renewable ethanol fuel comes from this plant. For the point, name
this crop whose fructose is extracted to make a “high fructose” syrup.
ANSWER: corn (or zea mays)


(Tossup 20) This substance is purified using zeolites in the process of cracking. One controversial method
of extracting this substance involves the injection of high-pressure fluid to create cracks in rocks; that
method is called hydraulic fracturing or fracking. This natural resource is used to make asphalt and
plastics. For the point, name this liquid fossil fuel that is used to make gasoline.
ANSWER: petroleum or crude oil


(Tossup 21) Thermally dimorphic fungi can exist as both mold and this other member of the fungi
kingdom, which instead grow pseudo-hyphae [HI-fee]. Saccharomyces [SAC-car-O-MY-sees] cerevisiae
[SAYR-uh-VEE-see-AY] is a commonly studied model organism in this member of the fungus kingdom.
This member of the fungi kingdom forms carbon dioxide bubbles which helps brew beer and causes dough
to expand. For the point, name this type of fungi whose baker’s variety helps bread rise.
ANSWER: yeast


(Tossup 22) With Joule, this scientist names an effect where real gases expand adiabatically in a throttling
process through a valve or porous plug. This scientist names an SI Unit that is the most commonly
used absolute temperature scale since zero on that scale marks “absolute zero.” For the point, name this
Scottish physicist who names the SI unit for temperature.
ANSWER: William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin (accept either underlined part)


(Tossup 23) The statement that every number has a unique prime factorization is the fundamental
theorem of this field. The “modular” form of this type of mathematics deals with remainders from division.
This type of mathematics names a type of sequence with constant difference. For the point, name this
foundational mathematics that deals with operations like addition and subtraction.
ANSWER: arithmetic


(Tossup 24) After hydrogen, this is the most abundant compound in the universe. This compound reacts
with water in a shift reaction. A mixture of this gas with hydrogen gas is called synthesis gas. It is formed
alongside with water in an incomplete combustion reaction. This gas causes oxygen deprivation due to its
strong affinity for hemoglobin. For the point, name this poisonous gas with formula CO.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide (accept CO before mention)




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                 Finals


(Tossup 25) This state of matter has on average the lowest thermal conductivities. The majority of the
members of “HONClBrIF [HUN- KUL - BRIFF]” are in this state of matter. The ideal form of this matter
is modelled by the law V times P equals n times R times T. For the point, name this state of matter
where the element or compound is free to move around and are not loosely bound together like liquids.
ANSWER: gases


(Tossup 26) 109P/Swift Tuttle is the parent object for one of these events that occurs in August and
takes its name from the constellation Perseus. The comet Temple-Tuttle is associated with some of these
events that occur in the constellation Leo. The Perseids and Leonids are examples of, for the point, what
events where meteors look like “shooting stars” radiating from a single source in space?
ANSWER: meteor shower (or meteor outbursts or meteor storms)


(Tossup 27) Fritz Haber helped develop the use of phosgene and mustard gas during this war giving
him the moniker “the father of chemical warfare.” Armor plated vehicles with caterpillar tracks such as
the Mark I tank first saw use during the Somme offensive of this war. For the point, name this global
war which saw the implementation of 20th century technology developed over the decade, fought between
Allied and Central powers.
ANSWER: World War I (or WWI; prompt on “The Great War”)


(Tossup 28) In 1900, the founding principles of this theory were established by Max Planck with his
solution to the ultraviolet catastrophe. A critical idea to this theory is that wave functions will “collapse”
upon measurement. Schrodinger’s cat is a thought experiment about this theory. For the point, name this
microscale theory which utilizes wave-particle duality and restricts systems to discrete quantized values.
ANSWER: quantum mechanics (or QM)


(Tossup 29) Members of Hirundinidae [huh-ROON-din-uh-DAY-ee] use this substance to help build nests.
This liquid sourced from Drosophila [dro-SOFF-uh-LA] melanogaster was used to discover polytene. The
parotid gland is one of three glands that helps produce this liquid. The enzyme amylase is first encountered
by sugars in the digestive tract in this liquid. For the point, name this biological liquid that helps prevent
plaque, produced by namesake glands in the mouth.
ANSWER: saliva (prompt on “spit”)


(Tossup 30) Because these structures aren’t always breeding related, the Humphrey-Parkes terminology
was developed. The barbs of these structures extend out of a central rachis. Proto like versions of these
structures were found on genus fossils like Archaeopteryx. Plumology is the study of the development and
use of these structures. For the point, name these epidermal bird structures which function similarly to
hair in mammals.
ANSWER: feathers (accept plumage until “plumology” prompt afterwards)




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Finals


Extra

(Tossup 31) Developing a fluorophore of this color won Osamu Shimomura, Martin Chalfie, and Roger
Y. Tsien the 2008 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. A porrin ring with a magnesium center is important to a
molecule that gives off this pigmentation in sheet-like membranes embedded in stroma. A fluorescent
protein from jellyfish A. Victoria shines this color as does chlorophyll. For the point, name this color of
plant leaves.
ANSWER: green

(Tossup 32) The structure and distribution of a ecosystem formed by these species titles Charles Darwin’s
first monograph. Members of these so-called “stony flowers” are hermatypic and obtain their energy from
zooxanthellae [zoo-ZAN-thuh-LAY-ee]. Their bleaching is occuring due to ocean acidification. For the
point, name these marine invertebrates that are principal to namesake ecosystems known as reefs.
ANSWER: corals




                                                  Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                              Replacements



                                        Replacements
Replacement Tossups

(1) Amaculara is a now extinct species that was thought to serve this ecosystem role with supporting
evidence from fossils of W-shaped indents on Cambrian trilobites. Lotka-Volterra equations model their
relation to their weaker counter role. Any trophic level can serve this role in relation to all trophic levels
below it. For the point, name this general class of territorial hunters that eat prey.
ANSWER: predators

(2) Two important points on this shape are the perihelion and aphelion. Johannes Kepler used these
shapes to improve upon astronomical predictions of Copernicus and Tycho Brahe. These shapes proved
more accurate than circles for the orbits of the planets. For the point, name this shape, a regular oval
with equal distance to two points.
ANSWER: ellipses (prompt on oval; prompt on “orbit”s with “an orbit that traces out what shape?”)

(3) In response to this condition, Immunoglobulin E antibodies are produced. The hygiene hypothesis
states that lack of exposure leads to this condition. Blood pressure drops rapidly and breathing is blocked
in serious forms of this condition that may lead to anaphylaxis [an uh fuh lack sis]. Hay fever is a specific
type of this condition. For the point, name this reaction by the body to normally harmless substances like
peanuts or pollen.
ANSWER: allergies (accept allergy; accept any type of allergy so long as allergy is mentioned)

(4) This force is described in pipes by the Darcy factor. The magnitude of this force does not depend on
surface area according to Amonton’s second law. A coefficient denoted mu describes this force which comes
in static and kinetic types. Drag is an example of this force in fluids which is decreased in magnitude by
lubricants. For the point, name this force that resists changes in motion.
ANSWER: friction (prompt on “drag” until mentioned)

(5) These birds are members of the family Trochilidae and are found exclusively in the Americas, with
their highest biodiversity in the lower elevations of the Andes. These birds are capable of backwards flight,
and males of birds in this family often have splendid throat feathers. These birds feed predominantly on
flower nectar, and include the smallest bird species in the world. For the point, name these birds whose
wings produce a namesake sound while beating up to dozens of times per second.
ANSWER: hummingbirds




                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                     Backup



                                              Backup
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Dark spots on this object usually appear in pairs with opposite magnetic polarity. Winds
from this object are deflected by Earth’s magnetosphere. Within about 5.4 billion years, this object will
turn into a Red Giant and engulf Mercury and Venus. For the point, name this yellow dwarf star that the
Earth orbits, which sits at the center of the solar system.
ANSWER: the sun (prompt on “the star in the center of the solar system” or similar answers)

(Tossup 2) The change in Gibbs free energy is defined as the change in enthalpy minus this quantity
times the change in entropy. The maximum efficiency of a heat engine is defined by this quantity for two
reservoirs. Motion due to this quantity ceases at absolute zero. For the point, name this quantity that is
measured on a scale named for Kelvin and describes how readily a system will accept or give up heat.
ANSWER: temperature


(Tossup 3) A crown formation of these organs is promoted by ethylene. One view point for the evolutionary
necessity of this organ was to provide a better habitat for mycorrhizal fungi. This organ’s system serves as
an important initiator in the axis it forms with the vascular system and the plant’s leaves. For the point,
name this part of the plant that digs into the soil to absorb water and nutrients.
ANSWER: roots


(Tossup 4) An enzyme containing molybdenum [muh-LIB-duh-num] and cobalt, helps reduce a diatomic
molecule of this element. Rhizobia helps fix a diatomic gas of this element in the soil, which is required for
plant growth. With three atoms of hydrogen, this element forms the product of the Haber-Bosch process,
ammonia. For the point, name this most abundant element in the Earth’s atmosphere, with chemical
symbol N.
ANSWER: nitrogen (accept dinitrogen; accept nitrogen gas; prompt on N or N2 before mention)


(Tossup 5) One instance of this type of landform in Punalu’u is black due to nearby basaltic lava flows.
The zig-zag pattern of this type of landform is due to longshore drift. The shingle variety of this type of
landform primarily has a higher percentage of pebbles in its washed-up sediment. For the point, name this
type of landform along a coast of water, usually made up of pebbles and sand.
ANSWER: beach (prompt on the “coast”; prompt on “shore”)


(Tossup 6) This computer concept can be achieved by using a series of flip-flops. In Von Neumann
[NOY-men] architecture, this unit interacts with the ALU and Control Unit. RAM is a “random access”
form of this concept. On a user level, this computer concept is achievable with a USB, an SD card, or a
hard drive. For the point, name this ability of a computer to remember information.
ANSWER: memory




                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                     Backup


(Tossup 7) Early developments of a theory of this structure include Democritus’s concept of them as
geometric shapes with attributes. Some Greek thinkers believed a “swerve” of these things gave rise to
free will. J.J. Thomson proposed the plum pudding model of this structure after his discovery of one of its
components. For the point, name this structure once believed to be “indivisible,” consisting of electrons
orbiting a proton-neutron nucleus.
ANSWER: the atom (accept hydrogen; prompt on the “electron” with “apart of what larger structure?”)


(Tossup 8) Paul Feyerabend was an active critique against this process, which he argued wasn’t used in
Against Method. Francis Bacon developed an early form of this method in Novum Organum. This method
can be divided into five steps: formulation, hypothesis, prediction, testing, and analysis, For the point,
name this method of observation and experimentation.
ANSWER: scientific method (prompt on method until mentioned)


(Tossup 9) Most instances of this shape have an Euler line which can be drawn through the center of the
nine-point circle. This shape names an inequality that states that the absolute value of x plus y is greater
than or equal to the absolute value of x plus the absolute value of y. By Euclid’s parallel postulate, all the
angles of this shape add up to 180 degrees. For the point, name this three-sided polygon.
ANSWER: triangle


(Tossup 10) Biogeography has developed primary and secondary zones named for this type of offspring
that are analyzed for speciation data. This type of living creature usually exhibits polyploidy, incomplete
dominance of both parental species, and sterility. Pizzlies are a rare example of, for the point, what type
offspring, such as a mule or liger [LYE-gur], a mix between two species?
ANSWER: hybrids


(Tossup 11) This class of compounds has a core structure made of 17 carbons fused together into three
six member rings and one five member ring. These organic compounds are able to serve as signalling
molecules which includes hormones like testosterone and progesterone. For the point, name this class of
drugs that are sometimes abused in sports as a performance enhancer for their ability to increase muscle
strength.
ANSWER: steroids


(Tossup 12) In interpreting this science, De Broglie developed modern pilot wave theory. In response
to the Copenhagen interpretation of this science, Albert Einstein retorted “God does not play dice with
the universe.” In this developed science, measuring the wave function causes it to collapse to a single
state. Schrodinger’s equation plays a key role in, for the point, what science of really small particles with
discrete energy levels.
ANSWER: quantum mechanics (or QM; accept quantum physics; prompt on “physics”; prompt on
“mechanics”; do not accept or prompt on “classical/Newtonian mechanics”




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                       Backup


(Tossup 13) The zone of plucking refers to an area where this process occurs to bedrock due to glacial
movement. Eventually, after this external process, deposition of the displaced sediment occurs. The sun
and the Earth’s heat are the two major energy sources for this weathering process. For the point, name
this physical removal of material by natural forces like wind and water.
ANSWER: erosion (accept weathering until mentioned, prompt afterwards; accept specific forms of
erosion like glacial erosion)


(Tossup 14) This element was first commercially produced via the Hunter process. A mineral containing
this element, rutile, is the cause asterisms in gems. This relatively-inert transition metal is extracted in the
Kroll process. The dioxide of this element is a common white pigment in paints and is used in sunscreen.
For the point, name lightweight metal with atomic number twenty-two and chemical symbol Ti.
ANSWER: titanium (prompt on Ti until mentioned)


(Tossup 15) While a prisoner of war, John Edmund Kerrich ran an experiment where he performed this
action 2000 times and showed it follows a random walk around 0.5. Perci Diaconi claimed to prove this
discrete random event with two outcomes is 1% more biased to the side facing up at the start of this
action. For the point, name this action, a textbook example of a 50-50 event because, in theory, heads
and tails are equally likely.
ANSWER: coin flip (coin tossing; accept specific coins or synonyms for toss like throw)


(Tossup 16) The first person to discover evidence for this process was Henri Becquerel. The occurrence
of this process in different isotopes of carbon is central to its use in dating. The electromagnetic form of
this phenomenon is represented by a spectrum and comes in radio, ultraviolet, and infrared varieties. For
the point, name this general term for the transmission of energy.
ANSWER: radioactive decay (accept nuclear decay, radioactivity, or radiation; prompt on decay)


(Tossup 17) This element forms a gas with hydrogen if it is present in a Marsh test. This is the most
common Group 7 element used to dope semiconductors like gallium. Paul Ehrlich developed a “magic
bullet” that used an organic compound containing this metalloid to treat syphilis, even though it’s
poisonous. For the point, name this yellowish metalloid with atomic number thirty-three and chemical
symbol As.
ANSWER: arsenic (prompt on As until mentioned)


(Tossup 18) Quantum analogues of this force include a model of it as “spin foam” with “quantum loops.”
String theory is a theory of everything that incorporates this weakest fundamental force. Henry Cavendish
used a torsional balance to determine a constant in Newton’s universal law of this force. For the point,
name this force that, on Earth, causes an acceleration of 9.8 meters per second squared and is denoted
little g.
ANSWER: gravity (prompt on g)




                                                    Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                  Backup


(Tossup 19) Four members of the Orthomyxoviridae family causes this disease. The hemagglutinin
[heme-ah-glut-uh-nin] and neuraminidase [nur-ah-am-in-uh-dase] antigens on the surface of the virus that
causes this disease undergo rapid mutation making vaccination difficult. Subtypes of this disease include
H2N3 and H1N1. Spain named a major outbreak of this disease in 1918. For the point, name this viral
disease which shares many symptoms with the common cold.
ANSWER: influenza (accept swine flu or bird flu)


(Tossup 20) For a given location, these time periods are related to changes to time spent in the circle
of illumination. These periods switch for the north and south hemisphere due to the inclination of the
Earth’s axis. These divisions of the year are categorized by daylight hours and weather patterns. For the
point, name these four divisions of the year, which include spring and autumn.
ANSWER: seasons


(Tossup 21) This compound was first isolated after Friedlieb Ferdinand Runge received a request from
Wolfgang von Goethe. After steaming, this compound can be removed by introducing supercritical carbon
dioxide. This purine-class molecule is likely to function by inhibiting adenosine receptors in the brain
preventing the onset of “tired” signals. For the point, name this stimulant found in coffee beans and tea
leaves.
ANSWER: caffeine (or guaranine; or methyltheobromine or 1,3,7-,trimethylxanthine; or Theine)


(Tossup 22) Early examples of this device used spark gap transmitters. This device can pick up “skywaves”
that have been bounced off the ionosphere. This device, invented by Guglielmo Marconi, can pick up
signals that have either been modulated in their amplitude or frequency. For the point, name this device
that picks up a namesake frequency of the electromagnetic spectrum on AM and FM stations.
ANSWER: radios (or radio receivers; accept radio transmitters; accept receiver; accept antennas
since the clues overlap)


(Tossup 23) Sets described by this concept can be represented with aleph numbers. The least integer
principle allows for a method of proof by this concept’s descent. A series converges if it approaches a
constant number at the series approaches this concept. John Wallis developed the symbol for this concept
which looks like a sideways eight. For the point, name this concept that refers to a limitless quantity.
ANSWER: infinity (accept infinite)


(Tossup 24) Only in cases of Prader-Willi syndrome does higher ghrelin correlate positively with this
condition. A strain of mice named for getting this condition have a mutation in the leptin encoding
gene, produced primarily by adipocytes. This condition leads to increased risk for type II diabetes and
cardiovascular disease; it is characterized by a BMI over 30. For the point, name this condition of extreme
body fat accumulation.
ANSWER: obesity (or obese; prompt on “being fat” or “overweight”)




                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                  Backup


(Tossup 25) This shape is the trajectory of an object moving greater than the escape velocity. This shape
names a class of functions that include sinh [“sinch”] and cosh [“cawsh”]. This is the shape of equations
of the form [read slowly] x squared over “a” squared minus y squared over b squared equals one. For the
point, give this conic section of a plane and double cone with two bows that are mirror images of each
other.
ANSWER: hyperbola


(Tossup 26) In mass spec, this element is indicated by an M-plus-2 peak of the same height as the M peak.
This element names a test for detecting unsaturation in hydrocarbons. This halogen is a reddish brown
liquid at room temperature. This element can exist in a +2 oxidation state like its neighbor Krypton. For
the point, name this element with atomic number thirty-five and chemical symbol Br.
ANSWER: bromine (prompt on Br until mentioned)


(Tossup 27) Astronaut Dan Burbank photographed one of these objects named Lovejoy. A famous
example of one of these objects is also designated 1P and has an orbit of 75 years. An atmospheric effect
gives these objects a coma, and they are sometimes accompanied with an icy tail. For the point, name
these “cosmic snowballs” which include a famous one named for Halley [HAY-lee].
ANSWER: comets (accept Halley’s comet)


(Tossup 28) The upslope form of this phenomenon occurs in the Great Plains due to humid winds moving
from the Mississippi to the Rocky mountains. Advection and radiation forms of this phenomenon can
cause visibility problems in cities like San Francisco. This phenomenon is caused by clouds whose base is
at, or close to, the ground. For the point, name this phenomenon which can sometimes be mistaken for
smog.
ANSWER: fog


(Tossup 29) In lung physiology models, the condition named for these structures is an assumption of
perfect gas exchange. A genus of Amoeba can cause a potentially fatal disease by covering these structures
with mucus, which has impacted Atlantic salmon populations. Zoologists refer to these structures as
Branchia. For the point, name these respiratory organs that allow fish to extract dissolved oxygen.
ANSWER: gills (accept Branchia before mentioned)


(Tossup 30) Within this organ is a structure whose number of cotyledons is used for classification. These
organs are typically edible, but phyloclades prefer genetic-transfer through latching their product onto
animal fur. These organs develop from the ovaries of flowers and store a specialized embryo that will later
germinate in the soil to grow a new plant. For the point, name these seed-bearing organs like bananas,
blueberries, and apples.
ANSWER: fruits




                                                  Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                    Backup


Extra

(Tossup 31) As of 2016, the largest calculation with this unit was 93 billion. This whole number is equal
to approximately 9.46 trillion kilometers. 3.26 times this distance is equal to one parsec. This astronomical
distance is commonly confused for a time since it has a unit of a time in its name. For the point, name
this distance that it takes a photon to travel in 365 days.
ANSWER: one light year (accept light years; the “largest calculation” is the size of the observable
universe)




                                                   Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                 Round 3



                                            Round 3
Regulation

(Tossup 1) This object was discovered in 1930 by Clyde Tombaugh. New Horizons made observations of
this object in 2015 where pictures revealed its “frozen heart,” which likely had nothing to do with this
object’s demotion to a trans-Neptunian object in 2006 after the discovery of Eris. For the point, name
this dwarf planet that used to be the 9th planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Pluto (accept 134340 Pluto)

(Tossup 2) Researchers at Johns Hopkins University used CT scans on one of these animals to determine
how they can strain their necks 270 degrees without injuring capillaries. Two types of this bird are
described as “great-horned” and “snowy.” Some of these birds are named for their screech while the most
widely distributed is the common barn type. For the point, name these nocturnal birds associated with a
“hoot-hoot” call.
ANSWER: owls (accept tawny owls; accept barn owls; accept screech owls; accept snowy owls;
accept great horned owls)


(Tossup 3) Carmichael numbers don’t have this property but satisfy Fermat’s test for it. Eratosthenes
names a sieve to find numbers with this property. The “twin” variety of these numbers differ by two. The
factorization of natural numbers into these kind of numbers is guaranteed by the fundamental theorem of
arithmetic. For the point, name this kind of number that has exactly two divisors, itself and one.
ANSWER: prime numbers (or primes; accept twin primes or prime factorization)


(Tossup 4) The first of these operations caused the deaths of Grissom, White, and Chafee due to a fire.
These operations frequently made use the Saturn V [“five”]. Michael Collins was the third member of one
of these seventeen operations; that operation included the quote “one small step for man.” For the point,
name these series of missions with astronauts like Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin going to the moon.
ANSWER: Apollo program


(Tossup 5) This material can be coated with kaolinite or talc to make it appear glossy. The invention of
this material is attributed to Han eunuch Cai Lun [“sigh” loon]. The creation of this material involves the
extraction pulp. Along with vellum, Johannes [YO-hahn-ess] Gutenberg implemented movable type on
this material to manufacture his namesake Bible. For the point, name this material made from ground up
fiber and cellulose in wood.
ANSWER: paper (accept coated paper; do not accept or prompt on “papyrus”)


(Tossup 6) Due to properties of 4f orbitals, lanthanides exhibit contraction of this quantity. Bohr names a
value of this quantity for ground-state hydrogen. Bond length is typically defined as the sum of two values
of this quantity. Francium has the largest value for this quantity, and helium has the smallest value. For
the point, name this distance from an atom’s nucleus to its electrons.
ANSWER: atomic radius (accept radius at the end; prompt on “atomic distance”)


                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                   Round 3


(Tossup 7) These phenomena can be classified into either diurnal [DIE-ur-null], semi-diurnal or a mixed
pattern. The neap variety of these phenomena occurs when the sun’s mass offsets it; the neap variety
occurs twice a month, as does the spring variety. These phenomena occur because the Moon has stronger
gravitational pull on the side of the Earth closer to it. For the point, name these daily changes in ocean
elevation levels.
ANSWER: (neap/spring) tides (or tidal bulges; or tidal phenomena; accept anything indicating a
change in tides; prompt on “change in sea level”)


(Tossup 8) This value is zero in every inertial reference frame. For an object moving uniformly in a
circle, this value is equal to the velocity squared divided by the radius. Newton’s second law equations
this quantity to net force over mass. For this quantity due to gravity on Earth, denoted little g, it is 9.81
meters per second squared. For the point, name this measure of how fast velocity is changing.
ANSWER: acceleration (do not accept or prompt on angular acceleration)


(Tossup 9) Sato generalized Ramanujan’s formulas for calculating this number. This is the smallest
positive x at which cosine of x is negative one. In radians, one degree is equal to this transcendental
number divided by 180. The area of any circle is given by this number times the radius squared. For the
point, name this ratio of the circumference to the diameter of any circle, approximately equal to 3.14
[“three point one four”]
ANSWER: pi (prompt on “3.14” and more decimal answers until mentioned)


(Tossup 10) Resolving errors in crystallographic data has led most scientists to believe osmium has the
highest elemental value for this quantity. The ratio of this quantity to that of a reference substance is the
specific gravity. This intrinsic property, commonly symbolized rho, defines how tightly an object packs its
mass into space. For the point, name this property equal to mass divided by volume, which can be used
to determine if an object floats in water.
ANSWER: density (accept descriptions of how dense the object / element is)


(Tossup 11) The introduction of the Ribwort Plantain led to one type of this insect, the Edith’s
checkerspot, nearly dying out. A rash named for this insect is a tell-tale sign of lupus. The wings of this
insect, like Heliconius, warn off predators using Mullerian mimicry. Along with moths, this insect makes
up Lepidoptera. Caterpillars metamorph into, for the point, what insect exemplified by the viceroy and
monarch?
ANSWER: butterfly (or butterflies)


(Tossup 12) Exchanging these items for profit was the goal of Mt. Gox [“mount gocks”]. Ethereum uses
similar technology to these items that were invented by the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto. These items
are exchanged along a consensus network that records transactions on a block chain. For the point, name
this peer-to-peer cryptocurrency, a coin named for a single one or zero on a computer.
ANSWER: bitcoins




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                 Round 3


(Tossup 13) This structure’s split deactivation is responsible for the tortoiseshell and calico patterns on
some cats. This structure’s lyonization creates a remnant Barr body. A child will always inherit a copy
of colorblindness on this chromosome if the mother is red-green colorblind. For the point, name this sex
chromosome which female mammals have two copies of.
ANSWER: X chromosome


(Tossup 14) This substance’s electron temperature, density, and potential can be measured with
a Langmuir probe. This substance is confined by a magnetic field in devices called tokamaks. This
substance’s occurrences on Earth include auroras and lightning. This substance is created through
ionization of gas. For the point, name this substance, commonly described as “the fourth state of matter,”
which occurs at high temperatures.
ANSWER: plasma


(Tossup 15) A powerful reducing agent contains lithium, three atoms of chlorine, and one atom of this
element. This metal’s oxide makes up corundum. The Hall-Heroult [“hall hero””] process is a common
method for smelting this element. Bauxite is rich in this element which replaced tin as a household product
in cans and foil. For the point, name this light metal with chemical symbol Al.
ANSWER: aluminum (or aluminium; prompt on “Al”)


(Tossup 16) Inge Lehmann suggested that this region has a solid component. Convection occurring in
one portion of this region is the proposed mechanism for dynamo theory. This region can be divided into
its outer molten component and inner solid component. For the point, name this region that sits directly
below the mantle in the center of the Earth.
ANSWER: Earth’s core (accept inner core; accept outer core)


(Tossup 17) The most common immortal cell line to study this species is known as HeLa. The existence
of this species is the reasoning behind the anthropic principle. Impact from this species has led some
geologists to suggest the Anthropocene epoch. Genomic evidence of skeletons has shown that this species
interbred with Neanderthals. For the point, name this species scientifically referred to as Homo Sapiens.
ANSWER: humans (or Homo sapiens until mentioned, prompt afterwards; accept people or other
synonyms; prompt on Henrietta Lacks)


(Tossup 18) The first of these utilities to be launched into space by NASA in 1973 was unsuccessful in
re-entry, scattering debris over Western Australia. Another of these utilities named Freedom was approved
by Ronald Reagan, but never built. Skylab and Mir are two examples of these satellites. For the point,
name these satellites in orbit that can support a team of astronauts, including the international one – the
ISS.
ANSWER: space stations (accept international space station; accept SkyLab until mentioned; prompt
on “satellite” until mentioned)




                                                  Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                   Round 3


(Tossup 19) Angiotensin converting enzyme is found in endothelial and kidney epithelial tissue, but it
primarily operates in this organ’s capillaries. DPPA is a surfactant in this organ that helps maintain
compliance. Gas exchange occurs in this organ’s alveoli. This organ’s expansion and contraction is
controlled by the diaphragm muscle. For the point, name this organ that filters in oxygen from the air.
ANSWER: lungs


(Tossup 20) Using this element and sulfuric acid, Gaston Planté made the first rechargeable battery. TEL,
an anti-knocking agent, was phased out of gasoline for containing this element. This element’s use and
presence in pipes is a biological hazard, despite its Latin name inspiring the English word for “plumbing.”
For the point, name this element with atomic number eighty-two and chemical symbol Pb.
ANSWER: lead (accept plumbum before “plumbing,” and prompt afterwards; prompt on Pb)


(Tossup 21) These phenomena can develop from thunderstorms known as supercells, which contain
mesocyclones that take in cool air to form a condensation funnel. The Enhanced Fujita scale measures
the intensity of these phenomena. In the U.S., these phenomena mostly form in a namesake alley. For the
point, name these rapidly rotating columns of air, which are sometimes called twisters.
ANSWER: tornadoes (or twisters until mentioned; accept whirlwind; accept mesocyclone until
“mesocyclone” is read)


(Tossup 22) The name for this element was given by Lockyer and Frankland after performing spectral
analysis on the sun. When cooled below four Kelvin, this element becomes a superfluid with no viscosity.
Nuclei of this element are equivalent to the alpha particle. This element is the lightest of the noble gases.
For the point, name this element used to fill balloons and can create a high pitched voice effect.
ANSWER: helium (prompt on He)


(Tossup 23) Self-balancing examples of this data structure include the AVL and red-black variety. This
data structure can be traversed post-order, in-order, or pre-order. This data structure takes its name from
a plant since it’s information is stored down descendants from a root node. For the point, name this data
structure with a root that branches down to its leaves.
ANSWER: trees


(Tossup 24) Geneticists studying the pathology of this class of diseases split mutations into passengers
and drivers for it. One subclass of these diseases can be divided into Hodgkin and Non-Hodgkin varieties.
Two subtypes of these diseases are leukemias and lymphomas. Cells implicated in these diseases become
dangerous when they metastasize. For the point, name this general class of diseases characterized by
malignant invasive tumors.
ANSWER: cancer




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                    Round 3


(Tossup 25) One statement of this kind was put forth by Georg Cantor and is named after the continuum.
Type I and type II errors occur due to accidentally accepting or rejecting the “null” version of this type
of statement. Riemann names a statement of this kind about his namesake Zeta function. For the point,
name this proposition a scientist makes, which might be testable by experiment.
ANSWER: hypothesis (or hypotheses; accept null hypothesis; accept continuum hypothesis;
accept Riemann hypothesis)


(Tossup 26) A type of these objects known for reaching hot temperatures is the Wolf-Rayet type.
These objects can be classified as Population I or II [“one or two””] depending on their metallicity. The
Hertzsprung Russell diagram is a scatter plot of these objects. Young examples of these objects create
energy by fusing hydrogen in their cores. For the point, name these spheroidal burning objects that light
up the night sky.
ANSWER: stars


(Tossup 27) This organ may make use of crystallin to increase refractive index . The anterior and posterior
chambers of this organ are filled with aqueous humour. Cataracts are a disease affecting this organ which
contains a sensitive spot known as the macula. This organ contains cone and rod cells in its retina. The
iris controls pupil size in, for the point, what organ responsible for vision?
ANSWER: eyes (anti-prompt on “lens”; anti-prompt on “cornea”; anti-prompt on “retina”)


(Tossup 28) Minute [my-newt] crystals in this mineral form jasper. This mineral is the simplest to exhibit
conchoidal [con-COY-dull] fractures and comes in milky, smoky, and rose varieties. This mineral is at the
bottom of Bowen’s reaction series and defines the value of seven for the Mohs hardness scale. For the
point, name this mineral made up of silicon-oxygen tetrahedra, the second most abundant in the Earth’s
crust after feldspar.
ANSWER: quartz (accept milky quartz; smoky quartz; accept rose quartz)


(Tossup 29) Assuming the cord is weightless and using two masses produces an Atwood Machine, which
is in this class of machines that also includes block and tackle systems. This machine consists of a wheel
on a fixed axle with a groove to support a sliding rope. For the point, name this simple machine whose
name comes from the action performed on the rope to lift up an object.
ANSWER: pulleys


(Tossup 30) Some flat panel variants of these devices work via electroluminscence. These devices
commonly use liquid crystals or light emitting diodes. Resolution is a measure of the accuracy of these
devices, which is often reported in pixels. Capacitors react to skin contact to make these devices interactive
in phones and tablets. For the point, name these devices used to provide a visual output for an electronic
device.
ANSWER: electronic visual displays (accept screens; accept touchscreens; accept flat panel displays;
accept ELDs or electroluminscent displays; prompt on television or TV with “What part of the TV?”)




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                               Round 3


Extra

(Tossup 31) In the yellow range of light, this element’s spectroscopic signature has a doublet separated
by less than a nanometer. To create a potential along an animal cell membrane, three ions of this element
are pumped out for two potassium ions. This element’s anion pairs with bicarbonate in baking soda. For
the point, name this lightest alkali metal that makes table salt with chloride.
ANSWER: sodium (accept natrium; prompt on Na)




                                                 Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                            Round 2



                                            Round 2
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Fourier names an equation that models the conduction of this quantity. In addition to
conduction, this quantity can also be transferred by radiation or convection. Temperature can be constant
but this quantity’s flow can still be exchanged between two bodies in thermal equilibrium. For the point,
name this quantity, often symbolized Q, that flows from hot temperatures to cold temperatures.
ANSWER: heat

(Tossup 2) During this phase, the moon shares its ecliptic longitude with the Sun. A second instance of a
moon of this phase in a month is referred to as a black moon. Solar eclipses can only happen during this
moon phase. This phase of the moon is between the waxing and waning crescent phases. For the point,
name this phase of the moon where the lunar disk is not visible to the naked eye.
ANSWER: New Moon (or Dark Moon)


(Tossup 3) These structures classify humans as diphyodont since they cycle between deciduous and
permanent. Insipid lesions in these structures can become caries if left untreated and not provided enough
fluoride to recover. They’re not bone, but they’re made of hydroxyapatite and sit between the maxilla and
mandible. For the point, name these calcified structures that help with chewing food.
ANSWER: teeth (or tooth; accept tooths or teeths)


(Tossup 4) One type of this reaction requires a good leaving group and in the case of first order kinetics,
creates a trigonal planar carbocation [CARB-oh-CAT-I-on] intermediate. Two reactions of this type
that occur with nucleophilic attack are called SN1 and SN2 reactions. This type of reaction has double
displacement and single displacement varieties. For the point, name this type of chemical reaction where
one substituent is swapped out for another.
ANSWER: substitution


(Tossup 5) Forty-five percent purity is the cutoff between this substance’s sub-bituminous [sub-bit-
TOO-muhNIS] and bituminous [bit-TOO-muhNIS] types. One method of cleaning this substance is called
molten-caustic leaching and removes harmful impurities like sulfur. Peat is a common precursor to this
substance, types of which include lignite and anthracite. For the point, name this carbon-containing black
rock used as a fossil fuel.
ANSWER: coal




                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                             Round 2


(Tossup 6) For a uniform distribution, this quantity is equal to a plus b over 2. The “harmonic” type of
this value for two numbers x and y is given by [read slowly] “two over quantity one over x plus one over y.”
The AM-GM inequality relates the standard form of this value to its “geometric” form. The “arithmetic”
form of this quantity sums the values and divides by the number of them. For the point, give this term
meaning the average of a set of values.
ANSWER: mean (accept specific types like arithmetic mean; prompt on “expected value”; prompt on
“average”)


(Tossup 7) Dominik Koll led a team that collected 500 kilograms of this substance to study interstellar
dust. Uchiro Nakaya developed a crystal morphological diagram to classify “flakes” of this substance based
on temperature. This substance doesn’t have time to accumulate during a flurry. For the point, name this
substance swept around at high speeds during blizzards.
ANSWER: snow (or snowflakes)


(Tossup 8) A large phylum referred to as segmented [this term] are also known as annelids. Animals
referred to as parasitic [this term] are referred to as helminths which includes one’s prefixed with hook
and pin. Parasitic round ones feed off an animal’s intestines. For the point, name this colloquial term for
slimy legless crawlers that include the common “earth” one, which is pink and eats soil.
ANSWER: worms (accept parasitic worms; accept segmented worms; accept hookworms; accept
pinworms; accept earthworms)


(Tossup 9) Because it fixes actin, the mushroom compound phalloidin also has this dangerous property.
LD50 is a commonly reported measurement of this property. The Fugu pufferfish is known for a powerful
tetrodo- compound with this property. Because Arsenic naturally has this property, it is used in pesticides
and herbicides. For the point, name this property of elements and compounds that are biologically
hazardous to ingest.
ANSWER: toxicity (or poisonous; accept obvious equivalents; accept biological hazardous until
mentioned)


(Tossup 10) John Wheeler proposed the hypothesis that all instances of this particle were actually one
universal entity. Positrons are equivalent to this particle travelling backwards in time. The Paul Exclusion
principle is the reason only one spin up and one spin down instance of this Fermion can share all other
quantum numbers as they fill atomic orbitals. For the point, name this fundamental particle that circles
the atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: electrons


(Tossup 11) The Jazz Singer was the earliest feature to take advantage of this phenomenon which it did
through the Vitaphone, giving rise to the genre of “Talkies.” Alexander Graham Bell is credited with a
transmitter that allowed for sending and receiving this phenomenon. For the point, name this phenomenon
that is perceived as thunder when lightning strikes and picked up by a microphone.
ANSWER: sound (accept audio recording)



                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                             Round 2


(Tossup 12) These proteins “restriction” variety are useful for cutting DNA along defined sequences.
Biomedical researcher Maud Menten helped Leonor Michaelis develop an equation to mathematically
model the kinetics of these proteins. These proteins typically end in “-ase” such as lipases. For the point,
name these proteins that serve as biological catalysts, speeding up reactions in the cell.
ANSWER: enzymes (accept restriction enzymes)


(Tossup 13) Ferrocene contains two ligands with this many atoms coordinated to the central iron. A
cyclic molecule with this many carbon atoms has twist and envelope confirmations, one less than a cyclic
molecule with chair and boat conformations. This number is one more than the number of bonds carbon
can form. For the point, name this atomic number of Boron and the number of carbons in pentane.
ANSWER: five


(Tossup 14) For this sort of machine, Tsiolokovsky [TSol-oh-KOV-skee] developed an equation modifying
Newton’s second law that relates the mass flow rate and velocity of the exhaust and thrust. The multistage
variants of this vehicle are capable of surpassing Earth’s escape velocity. For the point, name this vehicle
that can be used for fireworks, missiles, and launches into outer space.
ANSWER: rockets


(Tossup 15) Two important regions of the brain that light up in fMRIs [F-M-R-Is] that are studied in
this science are Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area. The computational subfield of this science extracts
morphemes and uses AI to analyze audio and text. MRIs [M-R-Is] can be used to visualize the articulation
patterns of speakers in this science. For the point, name this scientific study of language.
ANSWER: linguistics


(Tossup 16) The Japanese vessel Chikyu seeks to reach this region bounded by the Mohorovicic and
Gutenberg discontinuities. “Plumes” named for this region are a proposed explanation for the existence
of hotspots. This layer contains the asthenosphere and the lower part of the lithosphere. For the point,
name this viscous layer of the Earth between the core and the crust.
ANSWER: mantle


(Tossup 17) Enlarged blood vessels in this organ characterize GAVE which gives this organ a watermelon
appearance. Chief cells in this organ release a precursor to pepsin which helps break down proteins. This
organ is divided into four specialized compartments in ruminants. For the point, name this organ that
secretes gastric juice to break down food received from the esophagus.
ANSWER: stomach


(Tossup 18) A supercooled element of this group was used to create the first Bose-Einstein condensate.
The cation of one element of this group is found in the mineral halite. Hydrogen is usually not considered
part of this group due to differing chemical properties. Rubidium and Francium are members of, for the
point, what group on the far left of the periodic table?
ANSWER: alkali metals (accept group 1; do NOT accept or prompt on Alkali Earth Metals)


                                                  Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Round 2


(Tossup 19) The Euler-Lagrange equations are central to one type of this field dealing with changes.
The theorems of Stokes and Gauss are generalizations of a theorem in this field. One founder of this field
formulated fluxions and dot notation, though those were replaced by an alternative formulation. Gottfried
Leibniz and Isaac Newton independently discovered, for the point, what branch of mathematics dealing
with integration and derivatives?
ANSWER: calculus


(Tossup 20) The phenomenon is calmer at horse latitudes. An anemometer consists of a rotating cup to
measure the speed of this phenomenon. The strength of this phenomenon is reported using the Beaufort
scale. The “Trade” type of this phenomenon helps navigation. This phenomenon’s “chill” reduces apparent
temperature. For the point, name this movement of air from areas of high pressure to low pressure.
ANSWER: wind


(Tossup 21) One quantity named for this property can be computed via the parallel axis theorem. Angular
momentum is equal to that quantity times angular velocity. “Moments” named for this property are the
rotational analog of mass. Newton’s first law is sometimes referred to as the “law of [this property].” For
the point, name this property, the tendency of objects to resist motion.
ANSWER: (moment of) inertia


(Tossup 22) One complication of this condition characterized by low platelet count and hemolytic
anemia is HELLP syndrome. Postpartum depression is an unexpected emptiness after going through this
condition, during which the placenta serves as a filter to the umbilical cord. For the point, name this
condition that lasts around 9 months in humans during which a baby develops from an embryo.
ANSWER: pregnancy (accept being pregnant; prompt on “expecting” or other euphemisms; prompt
on “birth” until “9 months”)


(Tossup 23) A fast spinning example of an object with this status is Haumea. Another object that was
previously classified under this status was Vesta. Objects with this status have not cleared their orbit, but
must be spherical in shape. Examples of objects with this classification include Eris and Ceres. Pluto was
downgraded to, ftp what status, named for being smaller than being a planet?
ANSWER: dwarf planets


(Tossup 24) This molecule was imaged in “Photo 51” using X-ray diffraction by Rosalind Franklin.
Along with Maurice Wilkins, James Watson and Francis Crick received the Nobel Prize for discovering
the structure of this molecule. This molecule is made up of phosphates, sugars, and the nitrogen bases,
adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine. For the point, name this double-helix molecule, the basis of all
life.
ANSWER: deoxyribonucleic acid




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                            Round 2


(Tossup 25) Receptor neurons for this sense relay information to mitral cells and tufted cells. The part of
the brain responsible for this sense, the rhinencephalon [RINE-uh-SEFF-uh-LON], is smaller in humans
than other mammals. This sense is mediated by olfactory sensory neurons in the olfactory bulb. The
gustatory response is primarily mediated by this sense, even more so than taste. For the point, name this
sensation mediated through the nose to detect odors.
ANSWER: smell (accept olfaction before “olfactory”)


(Tossup 26) An acidic type of soil in this biome is called podzol. Trees that grow diagonally or sideways
in this biome are referred to as “drunken trees.” This biome meets the tundra at its northern boundary,
the point at which permafrost prevents the growth of trees. This is the largest land biome on the planet.
For the point, name this cold biome which contains lots of evergreen trees.
ANSWER: taiga


(Tossup 27) PMOS and NMOS transistors both are used in a MOS scheme prefixed with this letter in
Very Large Integrated Circuit design. A Swedish scientist names a temperature scale abbreviated with
this letter. This letter prefixes SI units at the power of 10 to the negative two. A computer language of
this name has “plus plus” and “sharp” successors. For the point, name this letter, the atomic symbol of
carbon.
ANSWER: C (accept C sharp; accept C plus plus; prompt on “Celsius”; prompt on “Centi”; prompt
on “Complementary”)


(Tossup 28) The length of these molecules in the aliphatic chain is used to characterize them as
short-chained, medium-chained, or long-chained. These macronutrients on average have nine calories per
gram. Triglyceride is an example of this type of compound. For the point, name this macronutrient,
structurally similar to oils, but more specifically refers to lipids that are solid at room temperature.
ANSWER: fats (accept lipids before mentioned, prompt afterwards; accept fatty acids)


(Tossup 29) This man gives his name to a conjecture for the maximum efficiency of packing spheres.
One law named created by this scientist gives a relation between the square of the orbital period to
the cube of the orbit’s semimajor axis. This astronomer developed the three laws of planetary motion
further developing Copernicus’s model of heliocentrism. For the point, name this German astronomer and
mathematician.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler


(Tossup 30) This process utilizes two “system complexes” that contain special pairs of molecules
designated P700 and P680.This process uses what is widely considered the most inefficient abundant
enzyme, RuBisCo. The Calvin cycle is part of the light dependent cycle of this larger process. For the
point, name this process used by plants to convert light into sugars.
ANSWER: photosynthesis (prompt on “Calvin Cycle” until mentioned; prompt on “light-dependent”
or “light-independent” reactions)




                                                  Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Round 2


Extra

(Tossup 31) At temperatures near absolute zero, one form of this element obtains superfluidity. Three
nuclei of this element fuse in triple alpha process, while the proton-proton chain in stars converts hydrogen
into this element. This element has the highest first ionization energy and is the lightest noble gas. For
the point, name this element with chemical symbol He that is used to fill balloons.
ANSWER: helium (prompt on He before mentioned)

(Tossup 32) The direction of these objects can be changed by elevators, while the angle of attack is
important property of the foils of these objects. The coordinates of these objects are specified by roll,
pitch, and yaw. Lift, thrust, and drag are essential factors in this mode of transportation, commercial
examples of which include Airbus and Boeing. For the point, name these vehicles that travel through the
air.
ANSWER: airplanes (accept airfoil; accept aircraft; accept airplane wings; prompt on “wing”s)




                                                   Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                               Backup



                                              Backup
Regulation

(Tossup 1) This process shares its name with a class of reactions also called dehydration synthesis. Reflux
is a chemical technique that repeatedly performs this process. When this process involves dust, snow can
form, while the opposite of this process is vaporization. This process occurs below the dew point and is
responsible for foggy windshields. For the point, name this process in which a gas turns into a liquid.
ANSWER: condensation

(Tossup 2) This is the principal ion to aid in exocytosis of neurotransmitter vesicles. By activating vitamin
D, parathyroid hormone increases the supply of this ion in the bloodstream. This ion is released by the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. When it binds to troponin, this ion activates muscle contraction. Osteoporosis
can occur when this ion is deficient. For the point, name this ion, which is mainly stored by humans in
their teeth and bones.
ANSWER: calcium ion (prompt on “Ca”; prompt on “Ca2+)


(Tossup 3) It’s not communication, but in the book A Mathematical Theory Of Communication, Claude
Shannon outlined ideas for a theory related to this other word. The space this concept takes up can be
measured using its namesake entropy. For the point, name this 10-letter word related to knowledge, such
as possessing facts, an important concept in communication and data science, commonly abbreviated to
just “info.”
ANSWER: information (prompt on “info”)


(Tossup 4) All elements heavier than iron come from these events, types of which include Type I and
Type II. One of the largest of these events in recorded history that occurred in 1054 was responsible for
the creation of the Crab Nebula. These events leave behind a black hole or neutron star after they occur.
For the point, name these large stellar explosions that occur at the end of a star’s life.
ANSWER: supernovae (prompt on novae)


(Tossup 5) A substance known as “purified protein derivative” is used to test for this disease by injecting
it under the skin and waiting two to three days for swelling. The BCG vaccine was developed for this
disease which the Mantoux [mahn-TOH] test was developed for. This disease is caused by a member of
the mycobacterium genus. For the point, name this disease commonly abbreviated TB.
ANSWER: tuberculosis (prompt on “TB” until mentioned)


(Tossup 6) This structure can be described using Miller indices. X-ray diffraction is a method to analyze
the atomic layout of these structures. Body centered cubic and face centered cubic are among the ways
these structures can organize themselves. These structures can be described mathematically with lattices.
For the point, give this term for solids that have a repeating structure.
ANSWER: crystals (accept crystallography)



                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Backup


(Tossup 7) This industry received a boost from John Kay’s invention of the flying shuttle. The main
device used in this industry works by intersecting warp and weft lines. Automatic looms are more common
today in this industry where synthetic fibres like polyester, acrylic, and nylon are used. For the point,
name this industry that weaves together fibers into fabrics and wearable items.
ANSWER: textiles (accept clothing or clothes; prompt on “weaving” )


(Tossup 8) This number is the first of the so-called “safe primes.” A regular polygon with this many sides
has interior angles of 108 degrees each. There are this many Platonic solids. The divisibility test for this
integer passes if the units digit is either this number or 0. The only prime factors of one million are two
and this number. For the point, give this number of sides in a pentagon.
ANSWER: five


(Tossup 9) A “little” one of these periods started in the sixteenth century. Interglacial periods occur
during these events, one of which was caused by the Great Oxygenation Event. Saber-toothed cats and
woolly mammoths lived during one of these events, which can lead to a “Snowball Earth” effect. For the
point, name these extended periods of time of low Earth temperature.
ANSWER: ice ages


(Tossup 10) This phylum has a cartilaginous odontophore which supports their characteristic “ribbon of
teeth.” Members of this phylum eat using a chitinous structure called a radula and move using their foot
muscle. The mantle of members of this phylum secretes their characteristic shell. Bivalves and gastropods
are members of, for the point, what marine phylum of invertebrates that includes snails and clams?
ANSWER: mollusca (or molluscs)


(Tossup 11) These objects were the subject of a “War” to find them between Othniel Marsh and Edward
Drinker Cope. Coprolite is a type of these objects. “Living” examples of these objects greatly resemble
extinct species, while “index” examples are used for dating purposes. These objects also name a type of
fuel that is nonrenewable. For the point, name these preserved remains of prehistoric organisms.
ANSWER: fossils


(Tossup 12) The strength of this force is proportional to the applied load according to Amonton’s first
law. Corresponding coefficients accompany the static and kinetic forms of this force. Newton’s first law
that an object in motion tends to stay in motion is acted against by this force. For the point, name this
force that resists the movement of an object which is low on slippery surfaces like ice.
ANSWER: friction




                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Backup


(Tossup 13) This element was central to the work done by the winners of the 2019 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry. This element’s salt is commonly used as a treatment for bipolar disorder. This is the lightest
element that has core electrons. Ions of this element name a class of rechargeable batteries used in
electronics. For the point, name this lightest alkali metal with atomic number three and chemical symbol
Li.
ANSWER: lithium (prompt on Li before mentioned)


(Tossup 14) This fundamental value for this quantity was measured in the Millikan oil drop experiment.
Capacitors are devices used to store this quantity. The rate of change of this quantity over time is equal
to current. Coulomb’s law states that force is inversely proportional to distance squared. For the point,
name this quantity measuring the presence or absence of electrons.
ANSWER: electric charge


(Tossup 15) Ada Lovelace is credited with the first one of these instructions for calculating Bernoulli
numbers. The Halting problem proves it is impossible for one to determine whether one of these sets of
instructions will always halt. They typically use for loops and if statements. For the point, give this term
for instructions used to execute computer computations.
ANSWER: computer algorithm (accept computer program; accept computer code)


(Tossup 16) A NASA space telescope for observing this portion of the spectrum is called WISE.
Night-vision goggles can detect the near-form of this radiation from heat imaging, which is why this type
of radiation is popularly known as “heat radiation.” For the point, name this portion of the spectrum
with wavelength shorter than radio waves and longer than visible light.
ANSWER: infrared


(Tossup 17) TrkA’s absence and L-N-G-F-R’s presence can induce this process. In this process, the
death-inducing signalling complex is formed. A cascade of caspases is triggered in this process by the
release of Cytochrome C into the cytosol, which is characterized by blebbing and fragmentation of the
cell. This cellular process is contrasted with necrosis, which is unprogrammed. For the point, name this
process of programmed cell death.
ANSWER: apoptosis


(Tossup 18) The main resource of this technology is moved around in a circle in the center pivot
application. Wheel line systems are a manual method in this technological discipline. Historically, this
technology made use of aqueducts, but in the modern age, drippers and sprinklers are employed. For the
point, name this method of controlling water and applying it to crops for agriculture.
ANSWER: irrigation (prompt on answers describing “water,” “water movement,” or “water control”)




                                                  Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                Backup


(Tossup 19) The main competitor to this event was known as steady state theory. Fred Hoyle coined the
name for this event. Observations of the cosmic microwave background provide evidence for this event,
shortly after which occurred a period of rapid inflation. Marking time zero of the universe, for the point,
name this event, a large explosion of matter that expanded out into the rest of the universe.
ANSWER: Big Bang


(Tossup 20) This is the number of carbon atoms in an unaromatic tub shaped cyclic molecule with four
double bonds whose dianion [dai-ANN-i-on] COT has this many carbon atoms. The speed of light is
commonly approximated as three times this power of ten. Boron is the first element on the periodic table
to violet a rule that elements tend to fill this many electrons. For the point, name this number of carbon
atoms in octane.
ANSWER: eight


(Tossup 21) This element was originally produced in the Deacon process. This is the element with the
highest electron affinity. Mercury bonds with this element in a two to two ratio, rather than a one to
one ratio as expected. This element’s ion is used to disinfect swimming pools and with sodium it forms
common table salt. For the point, name this element with chemical symbol Cl.
ANSWER: chlorine (accept chloride; prompt on Cl before mention)


(Tossup 22) This organ produces an important hormone that regulates blood pressure with angiotensin
and aldosterone. The functional unit of this organ includes notable features such as Bowman’s capsule
and the glomerulus; that functional unit is the nephron. The adrenal glands sit above this organ which
most people have two copies of. For the point, name these bean-shaped renal organs that filter blood and
produce urine.
ANSWER: kidneys


(Tossup 23) In addition to forest fires, El Niño increases the likelihood of these events on island countries
like Australia. California suffered a recent one of these events occurring from 2011 to 2017. Plants like
Cacti are said to have tolerance to this condition, allowing them to grow in arid climates with little
rainfall. For the point, name this condition characterized by prolonged shortage of water supply.
ANSWER: droughts (prompt on “water depletion” or similar answers)


(Tossup 24) A variable star in this constellation names a class of young variable “T stars” that are
pre-main-sequence stars about to join the Hayashi track on H-R diagrams. The red giant star Aldebaran
forms the red eye of this constellation which also contains the Pleiades [PLY-uh-DEES] cluster, the Hyades
[HI-uh-DEES] cluster, and the Crab Nebula. For the point, name this constellation that resembles a bull.
ANSWER: Taurus




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                            Backup


(Tossup 25) A paradox formulated by this scientist, Podolsky, and Rosen showcased quantum
entanglement. This man field equations led to the prediction of gravitational waves. This scientist names
a low-temperature condensate with Satyendra Bose. The special and general relativity were theories of,
for the point, what physicist who stated mass-energy equivalence as E equals m c squared?
ANSWER: Albert Einstein


(Tossup 26) An effect named for these species causes a decrease in the solubility of a solid. The energy
needed to remove an electron is named for these species. When salt is added to water, it dissociates into
two examples of this type of species. For the point, name these atoms and molecules with a positive or
negative charge due to loss or gain of electrons.
ANSWER: ions


(Tossup 27) This animal suborder contains the most niche-partitioned amniotic genus at over 400 species,
Anolis. This animal suborder taxonomically shares an order with amphisbaenians and serpents. The
largest member of this subgroup of squamate reptiles is the Komodo Dragon. For the point, name these
reptiles which include chameleons, geckos, and iguanas.
ANSWER: lizards (anti-prompt on specific lizards with which are apart of what larger suborder?”; accept
Lacertilia; prompt on “squamate”s or squamata before “squamate” mentioned; prompt on “reptile”
before mentioned)


(Tossup 28) According to legend, this scientist once dropped two balls off the leaning tower of Pisa to
show that falling time was independent of mass. This man improved upon Hans Lippershey’s design for
a telescope used to discover four moons of Jupiter that are named after him. For the point, identify this
Italian astronomer and physicist who was placed under house arrest for refusing to recant his heliocentric
views.
ANSWER: Galileo Galilei (accept either underlined part)


(Tossup 29) Due to this phenomenon, ocean levels have risen 0.3 centimeters per year over the last twenty
years. Though this phenomenon has recently accelerated, it has been occurring for the last 25,000 years.
The greenhouse effect causes this phenomenon by trapping carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. For the
point, name this phenomenon in which the Earth’s temperature is rising over time.
ANSWER: climate change (or global warming)


(Tossup 30) These organic compounds are examined in Ramachandran plots. Crucial motifs for these
compounds include leucine zippers.This class of compounds has secondary structures mostly made up of
alpha helices and beta-plate sheets. The fundamental units of these compounds are encoded on the codons
of mRNA. For the point, name these biological compounds whose primary structure is made up of peptide
bonds between amino acids.
ANSWER: proteins (prompt on poly”’peptide”s; prompt on “amino acid”s before mentioned)




                                                 Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                            Backup


Extra

(Tossup 31) A compound containing six atoms of this element attached to uranium is created during
nuclear power generation. The is the only stable element in its group that does not form a strong acid
when bonded to hydrogen. This element sits to the left of Neon on the periodic table. For the point, name
this lightest halogen with atomic number nine and chemical symbol F.
ANSWER: fluorine (prompt on F before mentioned)

(Tossup 32) In 1991, Al Gore helped popularize calling this service a “superhighway” and promoted
National Information Infrastructure for this service. In 2017, FCC chairman Ajit Pai proposed ending the
“neutrality” of this service. For the point, name this critical invention to the information age, a global
system of computer networks with features like the World Wide Web.
ANSWER: Internet (accept interconnected network; prompt on World Wide “Web”; prompt on “the
net”; prompt on “Information Superhighway”)




                                                 Page 6
                                         Round 2

Regulation Tossups
(Tossup 1) Heat is produced by non-shivering thermogenesis in this bodily tissue. An
abundance of mitochondria gives a signature "brown" color to one form of this tissue, whose
mass in the body is regulated by the hormone leptin. Patients with a BMI score greater than 30
have amassed large amounts of this tissue, which can be surgically removed using liposuction.
For the point, name this tissue that accumulates in people with obesity.

Answer: fat tissue (or adipose tissue)

(Tossup 2) Arsenic gives off this color when burned in a flame test. This is the color of hydrated
copper sulfate salts, as well as a pigment containing iron and cyanide that is named for the
country Prussia. Titrations often use a bromothymol derivative of this color as an indicator.
Litmus paper turns this color in solutions with a pH greater than 7, which act as bases. For the
point, name this color of cobalt, as well as the natural dye indigo.

Answer: blue

(Tossup 3) Rope, cone, and wedge are classifications of these weather phenomena.
Waterspouts are these phenomena that can occur over lakes and oceans. Dust devils are types
of these phenomena. These phenomena are rated 0 to 5 on the Enhanced Fujita scale, which
uses damage indicators. An "alley" of these features is located in the Great Plains. For the point,
name these rotating funnel-shaped columns of air.

Answer: tornadoes (accept twisters)

(Tossup 4) Haworth projections and Fischer projections are used as a 2-dimensional
representation of these compounds. Amylose and amylopectin are types of these compounds.
Biological polymerization of these compounds is accomplished with glycosidic bonds. The lac
operon allows bacteria to metabolize lactose, one of these compounds. For the point, name this
group of compounds that includes fructose and glucose.

Answer: sugars (or carbohydrates or (poly/mono)saccharides)

(Tossup 5) The Le Verrier [luh vuhREE ay] ring of this astronomical body might be shepherded
by Despina. A storm on this planet is called the Scooter. Voyager 2 discovered Proteus, one of
this body's satellites. This planet has a great dark spot, and its largest moon, which notably has
a retrograde orbit, is Triton. For the point, name this eighth planet from the sun, more massive
than Uranus which is named for the Roman god of the sea.
Answer: Neptune

(Tossup 6) Nathaniel Hodges recounts being one of the only physicians to stay in this city during
a 17th-century plague in Loimologia. Henry Whitehead assisted John Snow in mapping the
outbreak of cholera to a contaminated pump on Broad Street in this city. The royal court of
Charles II fled this city for Oxford during this city's "Great Plague." For the point, name this
English capital, home of the Royal Observatory.

Answer: London

(Tossup 7) Verapamil is one "channel blocker" of this ion. At fertilization, there is a spike in the
concentration of this ion in the cytosol, known as its namesake "bomb" or "wave." This element's
plus 2 cation [CAT-i-ON] is stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells. Sunlight helps
the body produce vitamin D, which helps absorb this element that is also found in milk. For the
point, name this element that is found in bones and has symbol Ca.

Answer: calcium (prompt on Ca)

(Tossup 8) Asymmetric elongated protrusions called yardangs form in these biomes. Sailing
stones may trace tracks in playas of this biome. Geologic features in these ecosystems include
ergs and their namesake "pavement." These biomes are often found near mountains because
they can be created by the rain-shadow effect. For the point, name these dry biomes that
generally contain lots of sand, exemplified by the Sahara.

Answer: deserts

(Tossup 9) John Turkevich developed a method for synthesizing nanoparticles of this element.
Aqua regia is principally used to make an electrolyte for the Wohlwill process by dissolving this
metal. Ernest Rutherford discovered the nucleus by firing alpha particles at a foil made of this
element. Iron pyrite is sometimes called the "fool's" version of this element. For the point, name
this shiny yellow metal, commonly awarded to first place finishers ahead of silver.

Answer: gold (prompt on Au)

(Tossup 10) This structure is above the Moho discontinuity. Cratons are the strongest portions of
this layer. The outer part of the lithosphere is made up of this layer, which comes in oceanic and
continental forms. It is generated at mid-ocean ridges and destroyed at subduction zones. It is
primarily composed of silica and oxygen. Resting atop the mantle, For the point, name this
outermost layer of the Earth's surface.

Answer: crust
(Tossup 11)Their reproductive cycles can be described as lytic or lysogenic. Reverse
transcriptase is used by the "retro" type of these entities to create DNA. They are surrounded by
a protein coat called a capsid. Infections caused by these pathogens cannot be treated with
antibiotics, and thus they are often countered with vaccines. Smallpox and measles are caused
by, For the point, which pathogens, examples of which include HIV and influenza?

Answer: viruses

(Tossup 12) One type of these materials that exist only at very low temperatures is named for
Nevill Mott. These materials have a large bandgap. Capacitors often consist of two parallel
plates surrounding one of them called a dielectric. Below their breakdown voltage, these
materials have very high resistivity. Glass and rubber are examples of, For the point, what
materials that block the flow of electric current, which are contrasted with conductors?

Answer: electrical insulators

(Tossup 13) For buffer systems, this quantity is calculated using the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation. Phenolphthalein [FEE noll THAY leen] changes from clear to pink as this quantity
increases. Mixing compounds with a large difference in this value can lead to a neutralization
reaction. It is defined as the negative logarithm of a solution's proton concentration. For the
point, name this scale that goes from 1 to 14 with low values for acids and high values for
bases.

Answer: pH

(Tossup 14) Gelo II is the addressee of this man's treatise The Sand Reckoner, where this
polymath attempts to count the grains of sand in the world. This man constructed a heat ray to
sink the Roman navy during the prolonged siege. He wrote the work On Floating Bodies. For
the point, name this Syracusan scientist who shouted "Eureka" after discovering a namesake
buoyancy principle.

Answer: Archimedes

(Tossup 15) Bragg's law is used to quantify the scattering of this form of light in a form of
crystallography. Tesla generated images using this radiation of a human foot in 1896 though
credit for their invention is given to W.C. Roentgen. This phenomenon lies between the more
energetic gamma rays and less energetic UV rays on the electromagnetic spectrum. For the
point, name this form of radiation that can penetrate through soft tissue to image bone.

Answer: x-rays (accept x-radiation)
(Tossup 16) This mathematician names a constant defined as the limiting difference between
the harmonic series and natural logarithm with Masceroni. This mathematician is often credited
with discovering graph theory to solve the Seven Bridges of Königsberg problem. This man
discovered the number which serves as the base of the natural logarithm. For the point, name
this Swiss mathematician from the 18th century who names the transcendental number e.

Answer: Leonhard Euler

(Tossup 17) Organisms in this kingdom form an often mutualistic relationship with plants in
mycorrhizae [my KUH rize ay]. Members of this kingdom have hyphae that make up their
mycelium. Algae form a symbiotic relationship with them in lichen ["lye ken"]. The death cap is a
highly poisonous organism in this kingdom. For the point, name this kingdom of organisms that
are primarily decomposers, like molds, yeasts, and mushrooms.

Answer: fungi or fungus

(Tossup 18) It's not "potential," but an "infinite well" described by this word is the particle in a
box model. This is the first word in the molecular geometry of xenon tetrafluoride. To predict
genotypes, biologists use the "Punnett" type of this diagram. The numbers described by this
word can be expressed as the sum of consecutive triangular numbers. For the point, name this
shape that describes numbers like nine and sixteen.

Answer: squares (accept infinite square well; accept square planar; accept Punnett square;
accept square numbers)

(Tossup 19) Apoplastic transport occurs within this structure. A middle lamella can be found
between two of these structures. Beta-lactam antibiotics inhibit the synthesis of this structure.
Gram staining distinguishes between different thicknesses of these structures in bacteria. This
structure is found in plant and bacterial cells but not animal cells. For the point, name this rigid
structure that surrounds cells and is made of cellulose in plants.

Answer: cell wall

(Tossup 20) This non-greek letter is used to describe a "pinch" experienced during plasma
confinement. A "score" denoted with this letter is an observed value minus the sample mean
divided by the sample standard deviation. As opposed to the XY system of humans, male birds
have two sex-determining chromosomes denoted by this letter. For the point, name this letter
used to denote the third axis on a coordinate plane.

Answer: z
(Tossup 21) A mathematical statement named for this shape can be shown by using the
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. A cevian is a line that divides one of these shapes into two parts.
The altitudes of this shape meet at the orthocenter, and the interior angles of these shapes sum
to 180 degrees. The Pythagorean theorem applies to the right examples of these shapes.
Scalene and obtuse are classifications of, for 10 points, what geometric figures with three
sides?

Answer: triangles (accept specific triangles like "right" triangle or "equilateral" triangle)

(Tossup 22) Products of alternative splicing are sent to this complex which has an A, P, and E
site. This complex's subcomponents are produced by the nucleolus. The rough endoplasmic
reticulum is distinguished from the smooth ER by the presence of these complexes attached to
it. They are present in bacteria and commonly mistaken for organelles despite lacking a
membrane. tRNA and mRNA are involved in translation at, For the point, what complexes that
manufacture cellular proteins?

Answer: ribosomes

(Tossup 23) Andreas Magraff is credited with the discovery of this element by heating calamine
ore and carbon in a sealed vessel. This metal is required by the African claw frog's transcription
factor IIIa ["three a"] which contains this metal's binding domain referred to as its namesake
"finger." Copper is alloyed with this metal to make brass. Supplements of this metal are used to
treat symptoms of the common cold. For the point, name this element with atomic symbol Zn.

Answer: zinc

(Tossup 24) This element transitions to superfluidity at its lambda point. Georges [JOR jay]
Rayet [RAY-uh] detected this element as an unknown yellow spectral line from the sun. Alpha
particles are nuclei of this element's most abundant isotope. This is the second-most abundant
element in the universe after hydrogen. For the point, name this second-lightest element used in
balloons.

Answer: helium (prompt on He)

(Tossup 25) Intense pressure, such as meteor impacts, can generate a "shocked" form of this
mineral. This mineral is found at the base of the Goldich dissolution series and Bowen's reaction
series. This mineral's piezoelectric properties make it important in clocks. Amethyst is a purple
variety of this mineral. For the point, name this mineral with a hardness of 7 on the Mohs scale,
a silicate with overall formula SiO2.

Answer: quartz
(Tossup 26) The statistician Ronald Fischer found that this man's results were "shocking"
because they were too exact, suggesting that this scientist falsified his ratios. Variations studied
by this scientist include yellow, wrinkled, and smooth. This man discovered the Law of
Segregation and the Law of Independent Assortment. This scientist coined the terms dominant
and recessive to refer to genetic traits. For the point, name this Augustinian monk, the "father of
modern genetics," who studied pea plants.

Answer: Gregor Mendel

(Tossup 27) This planet may cause a hypothetical phenomenon known as the ashen light. Along
with Uranus, this is the only planet in the solar system with a retrograde orbit. This planet's
highest point is Maxwell Montes. Due to sulfuric acid in its atmosphere, this planet has the
highest surface temperature in the solar system. With the naked-eye, this is the brightest planet
in the sky. For the point, name this planet, the second closest to the Sun.

Answer: Venus

(Tossup 28) Induction, compression, ignition, and emission are the four strokes of the
four-stroke variety of this device. Sadie Carnot developed his namesake cycle for a theoretical
one of these devices that takes heat and outputs mechanical work. Rudolf Diesel developed
one of these devices that mechanically compresses air in the cylinder to ignite the fuel. For the
point, name this device that converts energy into a mechanical form found prominently under
the hoods of cars.

Answer: engines (or motor)

(Tossup 29) This man devised a model of the solar system using Platonic solids, an idea he
wrote about in Mysterium Cosmographicum. One law formulated by this man has a
proportionality of G times M over four pi squared, that law relates the cube of the semimajor axis
to the orbital period. This man used observations by Tycho Brahe to formulate his law that all
planetary orbits are ellipses. For the point, name this astronomer who devised three laws of
planetary motion.

Answer: Johannes Kepler

(Tossup 30) A quantity symbolized U is subtracted from this other quantity to give the
Lagrangian, and U is added to this quantity to give the Hamiltonian. This quantity for an object is
equal to momentum squared over two times the mass. Generally, this quantity equals one-half
times mass times the velocity squared. A ball rolling down a hill has, For the point, what energy
of moving objects which is contrasted with potential energy?

Answer: kinetic energy (prompt on energy)
Extra
(Tossup 31) This is the first word in the name of a crystal-like material that exists in either
smectic or nematic phases. These substances exhibit capillary action, and this phase is
bypassed by substances that undergo deposition and sublimation. Nitrogen turns from a gas to
this phase at negative 196 degrees Celsius. For the point, name this state of matter formed
when substances melt.

Answer: liquid (accept liquid crystals)


(Tossup 32) One scientist from this country names a reaction that couples an organoboron with
a halide. Two mathematicians from this country name an elliptic curve theorem used to prove
Fermat's last theorem. An underground structure located in this country provided the first
evidence for neutrinos originating from the sun, as well as their oscillations; that experiment is
Super-Kamiokande. For the point, name this country of Taniyama, Shimura, and Akira Suzuki.

Answer: Japan
                2020 National Science Bee – Middle School
                            Semifinal Round
1.	  Edward	  Lorenz's	  work	  on	  numerical	  methods	  to	  perform	  this	  task	  using	  pressure,	  wind	  speed	  
and	  other	  metrics	  led	  him	  to	  determine	  that	  the	  phenomena	  involved	  in	  this	  task	  are	  non-­‐linear.	  
Due	  to	  the	  atmosphere	  behaving	  as	  a	  chaotic	  system,	  	  this	  task	  is	  often	  only	  accurate	  for	  up	  to	  
two	   weeks	   at	   most.	   Air	   precipitation,	   temperature	   and	   cloud	   movement	   can	   help	   with	   this	   task.	  
For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  task	  of	  determining	  atmospheric	  conditions.	  	  
ANSWER:	  forecasting	  the	  weather	  [accept	  weather	  prediction;	  or	  predicting	  the	  weather]	  
ACCEPT:	  logical	  equivalence	  like	  "inferring	  weather	  patterns";	  or	   “meteorology”	  
REJECT:	  more	  specific	  weather-­‐related	  phenomena	  prediction	  such	  as	  "Tornado	  predicting"	  or	  
"Temperature	  prediction"	  
	  
2.	  This	  sort	   of	  mixture	   is	  the	  active	   ingredient	  in	  a	  Jones	  reductor.	  Hydrochloric	  acid	  and	  one	  of	  
these	  mixtures	  with	  Zinc	  are	  used	  to	  reduce	  ketones	  in	  a	  Clemmensen	  reduction.	  In	  dentistry,	  
these	   mixtures	   with	   around	   25%	   silver	   and	   10%	   copper	   are	   controversially	   used	   for	   some	  
fillings.	  The	  protective	  layer	  of	  aluminum	  oxide	  is	  quickly	  corroded	  by	  mercury	  forming	  one	  of	  
these	  mixtures.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  mixtures,	  the	  uniting	  of	  mercury	  and	  another	  metal.	  	  
ANSWER:	  amalgams	  [prompt	  on	  mercury	  mixtures	  or	  mercury	  solution	  and	  similar]	  
	  
3.	   This	   duck-­‐typed	   language	   was	   used	   to	   write	   the	   web	   building	   framework	   Django.	   This	  
interpreter	  language,	  which	  is	  now	  on	  version	  3.7,	  still	  provides	  some	  backwards	  compatibility	  
for	  version	  2.7	  which	  was	  sunsetted	  in	  2020.	  This	  language	  was	  created	  by	  Guido	  van	  Rossum	  in	  
1991	   and	   provides	   ample	   readability	   by	   requiring	   tabs	   to	   delimit	   bodies.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	  
this	  programming	  language	  named	  for	  a	  comedy	  sketch	  crew	  and	  not	  after	  a	  snake.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Python	  
	  
4.	   The	   superclusters	   and	   voids	   that	   permeate	   this	   phenomenon	   were	   elucidated	   by	   Martin	   Rees	  
and	  Dennis	  Sciamma,	  giving	  an	  explanation	  for	  how	  photons	  are	  affected	  by	  this	  phenomenon	  in	  
the	  Sachs-­‐Wolfe	  effect.	  The	  polarization	  patterns	  of	  this	  phenomenon	  can	  be	  divided	  into	  E	  and	  
B	   modes,	   and	   satellite	   missions	   to	   collect	   data	   from	   this	   phenomenon	   include	   COBE,	   WMAP	   and	  
Planck.	   Bell	   Labs	   astronomers	   Robert	   Pensiaz	   and	   Arno	   Wilson	   won	   the	   1978	   Nobel	   Prize	   in	  
Physics	   for	   the	   discovery	   of	   this	   "radiation	   noise."	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   radiation	   that	  
permeates	  the	  universe	  whose	  wavelength	  is	  the	  same	  radiation	  range	  as	  that	  used	  to	  quickly	  
reheat	  food.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Cosmic	  Microwave	  Background	  Radiation	  [or	  simply	  CMBR]	  
AFTER	  "radiation	  (noise)"	  IS	  READ	  ACCEPT:	  Cosmic	  Microwave	  Background	  [or	  CMB]	  
	  
5.	  A	  spectrum	  of	  an	  operator	  contains	  scalars	  of	  this	  prefix	  by	  the	  Spectral	  theory.	  Roots	  of	  the	  
characteristic	  polynomial	  of	  a	  matrix	  have	  this	  prefix.	  Both	  x	  in	  the	  equation	  A	  x	  equals	  lambda	  x	  
and	  the	  scalars	  it	  contains	  are	  prefixed	  by	  this	  word	  for	  a	  given	  matrix	  A.	  This	  prefix	  comes	  from	  
the	  German	  for	  "characteristic"	  and	  lambda	  is	  used	  in	  Linear	  Algebra	  to	  represent	  scalars	  with	  
this	  prefix.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  prefix	  of	  certain	  values	  and	  vectors	  of	  matrices.	  
ANSWER:	  eigen	  [accept	  eigenvectors;	  accept	  eigenvalues]	  
	  
6.	   AGAMOUS	   is	   a	   mutant	   in	   a	   long-­‐day	   model	   organism	   used	   to	   study	   this	   process.	   Cadastral	  
genes	   play	   a	   role	   in	   dividing	   out	   three	   regions	   where	   type	   A	   and	   C	   genes	   are	   mutually	  
antagonistic	  in	  the	  ABC	  Model	  of	  this	  process.	  This	  process	  results	  in	  the	  formation	  of	  perianth,	  
pistils	  and	  stamens.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  characteristic	  angiosperm-­‐related	  process	  during	  
which	  a	  reproductive	  organ	  with	  petals	  is	  formed	  by	  plants	  like	  roses	  and	  tulips.	  	  
ANSWER:	   budding	   [accept	   flower	   development;	   accept	   blossoming;	   accept	   blooming	   (until	  
mentioned)	  ]	  
	  
7.	   The	   controversial	   compound	   Thimerosal	   is	   used	   as	   a	   preservative	   for	   some	   of	   these	  
preparations.	   Aluminum	   hydroxide	   is	   an	   adjuvant	   used	   in	   some	   of	   these	   preparations	   which	  
come	   in	   attenuated	   and	   inactivated	   varieties.	   Andrew	   Wakefield	   lost	   his	   practising	   licence	   for	  
continuously	  claiming	  that	  the	  MMR	  one	  of	  these	  preparations	  could	  be	  linked	  to	  autism.	  For	  the	  
point,	  name	  these	  injections	  designed	  to	  emulate	  pathogens	  and	  strengthen	  the	  immune	  system	  
to	  prevent	  infection,	  which	  succeeded	  in	  eradicating	  smallpox.	  	  
ANSWER:	  vaccines	  
	  
8.	  In	  this	  specific	  device,	  an	  electrolyte	  serves	  as	  a	  guard	  separating	  a	  certain	  positive	  ion	  and	  
trapping	   it	   in	   graphite	   while	   electrons	   are	   able	   to	   flow	   back	   through	   a	   circuit.	   A	   separator	   helps	  
prevent	   explosions	   in	   these	   devices	   which	   can	   sometimes	   happen	   when	   mistakes	   in	   the	  
manufacturing	  process	  occur	  causing	  the	  cathode	  and	  anode	  to	  touch,	  as	  happened	  with	  some	  
Samsung	  Galaxy	  Note	  7s.	  	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  rechargeable	  battery	  that	  makes	  use	  of	  the	  
lightest	  alkali	  metal.	  	  
ANSWER:	   lithium	   ion	   battery	   [prompt	   on	   reusable	   /	   rechargeable	   battery;	   after	   "battery"	  
accept	  lithium	  ion]	  
	  
9.	   The	   curving	   of	   clouds	   around	   these	   events	   leads	   to	   a	   so-­‐called	   stadium	   effect.	   They're	   not	  
thunderstorms,	   but	   the	   ascending	   motion	   of	   Madden-­‐Julian	   oscillations	   is	   associated	   with	   these	  
events.	   The	   Northwestern	   Pacific	   Ocean	   is	   an	   active	   basin	   for	   these	   events	   year	   round.	  
Hurricane	  John	  became	  one	  of	  these	  things	  in	  1994	  once	  it	  crossed	  the	  International	  Date	  Line.	  
For	   the	   point,	   name	   these	   violent	   weather	   storms	   that	   affect	   Taiwan,	   Japan,	   the	   Philippines,	   and	  
China.	  	  	  
ANSWER:	  typhoons	  [prompt	  on	  cyclone	  or	  tropical	  cyclones;	  accept	  Hurricane	  until	  the	  syllable	  
 “west”	  in	   “Nortthwestern”	  in	  line	  4	  is	  read.]	  
	  
10.	   This	   scientist	   won	   the	   Nobel	   Prize	   in	   Physiology	   or	   Medicine	   in	   1953	   for	   his	   work	   on	  
discovering	  a	  set	  of	  biochemical	  reactions	  alongside	  Fritz	  Lipmann,	  who	  received	  the	  prize	  for	  
his	   related	   work	   on	   Coenzyme	   A.	   This	   scientist	   gives	   the	   alternative	   name	   to	   a	   cycle	   that	   begins	  
with	   the	   addition	   of	   pyruvate	   to	   oxaloacetate	   and	   occurs	   in	   the	   matrix	   of	   mitochondria	   as	   a	  
precursor	  to	  oxidative	  phosphorylation.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  German-­‐born	  British	  biologist	  
who	  gives	  an	  alternate	  name	  to	  the	  Citric	  Acid	  cycle.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Hans	  Adolf	  Krebs	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
11.	  Lewis	  acids	  are	  responsible	  for	  the	  dative	  type	  of	  this	  interaction.	  The	  inductive	  effect	  occurs	  
through	  these	  interactions.	  The	  bent	  variety	  of	  these	  interactions	  cause	  high	  ring	  strain,	  occur	  in	  
molecules	  like	  cyclopropane,	  and	  are	  alternatively	  named	  for	  resembling	  bananas.	  These	  types	  
of	   structures	   form	   when	   electrons	   are	   shared	   between	   two	   atoms	   or	   when	   one	   atom	   rips	   the	  
electron	   off	   another.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   structure	   formed	   between	   two	   atoms	   which	  
include	  covalent	  and	  ionic	  variants.	  	  
ANSWER:	  bonds	  [accept	  covalent	  bonds;	  accept	  double	  bonds]	  
	  
12.	   It's	   not	   related	   to	   chromatography,	   but	   one	   of	   the	   most	   common	   uses	   of	   calculating	  
theoretical	  plates	  is	  for	  this	  process	  to	  increase	  its	  efficiency.	  A	  solution	  of	  96%	  water	  and	  4%	  
ethanol	  forms	  when	  performing	  this	  process	  on	  ethanol,	  which	  cannot	  be	  extracted	  further	  as	  
the	  solution	  is	  azeotropic.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  process	  of	  separating	  two	  liquids	  by	  raising	  
temperature	  to	  a	  boiling	  point.	  	  
ANSWER:	  distillation	  
	  
13.	  In	  this	  type	  of	  cell,	  apelin	  produces	  a	  positive	  feedback	  loop	  to	  increase	  insulin	  production.	  
These	   cells	   are	   separated	   into	   three	   tissue	   types:	   WAT,	   MAT,	   and	   BAT.	   The	   large	   amount	   of	  
mitochondria	   in	   one	   type	   of	   these	   cells	   give	   them	   a	   brown	   color	   and	   assist	   in	   thermogenesis.	  
Enterocytes	  and	  these	  cells	  secrete	  leptin	  to	  help	  suppress	  the	  hunger	  response	  which	  regulates	  
their	  size	  and	  storage.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  cells	  that	  specialize	  in	  storing	  lipid	  fat	  droplets.	  	  
ANSWER:	  adipocytes	  [accept	  adipose	  tissue;	  prompt	  on	  fat	  cells	  or	  fat	  tissues]	  
	  
14.	   A	   widely	   studied	   counterexample	   to	   many	   problems	   in	   the	   theory	   that	   studies	   these	  
constructs	   was	   given	   by	   Julius	   Petersen;	   that	   example	   of	   one	   of	   these	   constructs	   has	   a	   Hamilton	  
path,	   but	   no	   Hamilton	   cycle,	   a	   crucial	   requirement	   of	   the	   travelling	   salesman	   problem.	   Euler	  
helped	   establish	   the	   theory	   of	   these	   constructs	   by	   proving	   that	   the	   seven	   bridges	   of	   Konigsberg	  
could	  be	  reduced	  to	  a	  problem	  on	  one	  of	  these	  constructs.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  constructs	  
with	  vertices	  whose	  relation	  is	  shown	  through	  connected	  edges.	  	  
ANSWER:	  graphs	  
	  
Description	  Acceptable	  
15.	   The	   principle	   offense	   that	   triggered	   this	   event	   came	   from	   a	   text	   whose	   two	   main	   logical	  
interlocutors	   Salviati	   and	   Sagredo	   are	   at	   argument	   with	   a	   consistently	   refuted	   Aristotelian	  
named	  Simplicio.	  Shortly	  after	  this	  event,	  its	  target	  apocryphally	  said	  "Eppur	  si	  muove"	  or	  "and	  
yet	   it	   moves"	   in	   defense	   of	   writing	   the	   Dialogue	  Concerning	  Two	  Chief	  World	  Systems.	   For	   the	  
point,	   name	   this	   event	   where	   the	   discoverer	   of	   four	   moons	   of	   Jupiter	   was	   found	   guilty	   of	   heresy	  
for	  defending	  heliocentrism	  and	  placed	  under	  house	  arrest	  until	  his	  death.	  	  
ANSWER:	  trial	  of	  galileo	  [accept	  reasonable	  equivalent	  answers	  indicating	  Galileo]	  
	  
16.	   If	   an	   experiment	   has	   this	   property,	   repeated	   measurements	   of	   some	   measurand	   under	  
identical	   conditions	   yields	   measurements	   that	   closely	   agree.	   Psychological	   experiments	   often	  
fail	   to	   have	   this	   property,	   likely	   because	   further	   trials	   of	   the	   same	   psychological	   experiment	  
cannot	  often	  be	  assumed	  to	  be	  parallel	  on	  the	  same	  subjects.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  property	  
of	  an	  experiment	  where	  performing	  the	  experiment	  again	  achieves	  similar	  results.	  
ANSWER:	   reproducibility	   [accept	   word	   forms	   like	   reproducible	   or	   reproduction;	   accept	  
repeatability	   and	   word	   forms	   like	   repeatable;	   accept	   verifiable	   or	   word	   forms	   like	  
verifiability]	  	  
	  
17.	   The	   highest	   risk	   of	   cyclothymia	   is	   from	   the	   type	   1	   form	   of	   this	   disorder.	   Opposite	   pole	  
symptoms	   commingle	   in	   the	   "mixed	   state"	   specifier	   for	   this	   disease.	   Rapid	   cycling	   is	   a	   severe	  
form	   of	   this	   disease	   characterized	   by	   four	   or	   more	   mood	   episodes	   in	   a	   year.	   Lithium	   is	  
commonly	   used	   to	   treat	   this	   psychiatric	   disorder	   that	   can	   cause	   symptoms	   of	   euphoria	   for	  
periods	   followed	   by	   periods	   of	   dysphoria.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   disease	   characterized	   by	  
bouts	  of	  mania	  and	  depression.	  	  
ANSWER:	  bipolar	  disorder	  [accept	  manic-­‐depressive	  disorder	  or	  manic	  depression]	  	  
	  
18.	  Local	  operations	  and	  classical	  communication	  can	  be	  used	  to	  transform	  states	  exhibiting	  this	  
phenomenon.	  The	  states	  exhibiting	  this	  phenomenon	  give	  rise	  to	  Bell	  pairs.	  This	  phenomenon	  is	  
the	  subject	  of	  a	  debate	  where	  two	  particles	  with	  unstable	  spins	  head	  in	  opposite	  directions.	  	  The	  
EPR	   paradox	   brought	   up	   that	   potential	   violation	   due	   to	   this	   phenomenon.	   Einstein	   criticized	  
this	   phenomenon	   with	   that	   paradox	   calling	   it	   "spooky	   action	   at	   a	   distance."	   For	   the	   point,	   name	  
this	  quantum	  phenomenon	  where	  two	  quantum	  states	  are	  bundled	  into	  one.	  	  
ANSWER:	  entanglement	  [accept	  answers	  like	  entangled	  states]	  
	  
19.	  The	  name	  for	  these	  equations	  is	  shared	  with	  a	  competitive	  form	  that	  instead	  uses	  a	  logistic	  
equation	  basis.	  These	  equations	  typically	  take	  the	  following	  form:	  Equation	  1	  (read	  slowly)	  dx-­‐dt	  
equals	  alpha	  x	  minus	  beta	  times	  x	  times	  y.	  Equation	  2	  (read	  slowly)	  dy-­‐dt	  =	  delta	  x	  times	  y	  minus	  
gamma	   times	   y.	   Those	   two	   equations	   encode	   the	   self	   interaction	   of	   the	   species	   and	   its	  
interaction	   with	   its	   counter-­‐role	   species.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   these	   doubly	   eponymous	  
equations	  important	  to	  mathematical	  biology	  that	  model	  predator-­‐prey	  relations.	  	  
ANSWER	   Lotka-­‐Volterra	   equations	   [accept	   Competitive	   Lotka-­‐Volterra;	   prompt	   on	   partial	  
answers;	  prompt	  on	  predator-­‐prey	  equations]	  
	  
20.	  Vervet monkeys and other members of the Chlorocebus genus are sometimes erroneously referred
to as the African [this color] monkey. A protein from Aequorea victoria, a bioluminescent jellyfish
has this color in its name because it emits a wavelength in the 500 range after being excited with blue
light. A molecule with a porphyrin ring and a central magnesium ion is found in thylakoids and is
responsible for giving off this pigment for organisms that undergo photosynthesis. For the point, name
this color reflected by chlorophyll responsible for giving leaves and grass their characteristic hue.
ANSWER: green
	  
21.	   These	   structures'	   substructure	   includes	   a	   transition	   function,	   an	   instruction	   table,	   and	   an	  
infinite	   tape	   written	   and	   read	   by	   a	   head	   pointer.	   These	   constructs	   are	   the	   subject	   of	   the	   Busy	  
Beaver	   Game.	   An	   effective	   method	   exists	   for	   a	   function	   over	   the	   natural	   numbers	   if	   it	   is	  
computed	  by	  one	  of	  these	  machines	  according	  to	  Alonzo	  Church.	  These	  models	  are	  the	  subject	  
of	   the	   halting	   problem.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   general-­‐purpose	   computer	   model,	   a	   so-­‐called	  
machine	  named	  for	  a	  British	  computer	  scientist.	  
ANSWER:	  Turing	  Machine	  [accept	  TM]	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
22.	   The	   lack	   of	   terrestrial	   or	   aquatic	   fossils	   spanning	   the	   beginning	   of	   this	   period	   followed	   by	  
the	  transition	  from	  placoderms	  to	  ray-­‐finned	  fish	  is	  known	  as	  Romer's	  Gap.	  During	  this	  period,	  
predatory	   predecessors	   to	   the	   modern-­‐day	   dragonfly	   with	   a	   2	   foot	   wingspan	   were	   thriving.	  
Tree	   fern	   based	   ecosystems	   dominated	   following	   the	   Rainforest	   collapse	   of	   this	   period	   which	  
divided	   into	   the	   Mississippian	   and	   Pennsylvanian	   periods.For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   geological	  
period	  that	  followed	  the	  Devonian	  period,	  during	  which	  global	  formation	  of	  coal	  beds	  occurred.	  	  	  
ANSWER:	  carboniferous	  period	  
	  
23.	   Events	   that	   helped	   bolster	   this	   theory	   and	   carry	   out	   its	   predictions	   include	   the	   OPAL	  
experiment	   at	   LEP,	   alongside	   ALEPH,	   DELPHI	   and	   L3.	   Those	   experiments	   of	   this	   theory	   took	  
place	   under	   the	   European	   Organization	   for	   Nuclear	   Research.	   Limitations	   to	   this	   theory	   include	  
the	   inability	   to	   account	   for	   neutrino	   oscillators	   or	   baryon	   asymmetry.	   This	   theory	   overarches	  
quantum	  chromodynamics,	  and	  was	  bolstered	  by	  the	  finding	  of	  the	  Higgs	  boson	  in	  2012.	  For	  the	  
point,	  name	  this	  physics	  "model"	  that	  encodes	  three	  of	  the	  four	  fundamental	  forces	  of	  physics	  
while	  classifying	  the	  known	  elementary	  particles.	  	  
ANSWER:	  standard	  model	  [accept	  standard	  after	  "model"]	  
	  
24.	   To	   measure	   the	   stiffness	   of	   compounds	   of	   this	   type,	   Hans	   Kuhn	   developed	   a	   namesake	  
length.	  An	  equation	  modelling	  the	  formation	  of	  this	  type	  of	  compound	  sets	  X	  bar	  sub	  n	  equal	  to	  
one	   divided	   by	   quantity	   one	   minus	   the	   extent	   of	   reaction.	   The	   production	   of	   this	   type	   of	  
compound	   can	   be	   modelled	   by	   Carothers	   equation	   and	   can	   be	   sped	   up	   by	   use	   of	   a	   Ziegler-­‐Natta	  
catalyst.	  This	  type	  of	  compound	  is	  formed	  by	  step-­‐growth	  or	  a	  chain-­‐growth	  mechanism.	  For	  the	  
point,	  name	  these	  compounds	  made	  up	  of	  chains	  of	  monomers.	  
ANSWER:	  polymers	  
	  
25.	  David	  Kirzhnits	  worked	  with	  one	  of	  the	  discoverers	  of	  this	  process	  on	  its	  predecessor	  which	  
proposed	  "cosmological	  phase	  transitions."	  This	  process	  underwent	  damped	  oscillations	  which	  
decayed	   into	   radiation	   equilibrating	   to	   the	   reheat	   temperature.	   Alan	   Guth	   and	   Andrei	   Linde	  
proposed	   this	   process	   as	   an	   explanation	   to	   the	   horizon	   and	   flatness	   problems,	   describing	   it	   as	   a	  
sort-­‐of	   gravitational	   repulsion.	   This	   process	   started	   occurring	   about	   10	   to	   the	   negative	   36	  
seconds	  after	  the	  principal	  event	  that	  started	  the	  universe.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  process	  of	  
rapid	  expansion	  that	  occurred	  shortly	  after	  the	  Big	  Bang.	  	  	  
ANSWER:	  Cosmic	  Inflation	  
	  
26.	   Merlin	   cannot	   send	   Arthur	   a	   convincing	   one	   of	   these	   constructs	   for	   all	   strings	   not	   in	   the	  
language	   L	   by	   the	   Arthur-­‐Merlin	   protocol.	   	   The	   relationship	   between	   computer	   programs	   and	  
these	   constructs	   is	   given	   by	   the	   Curry-­‐Howard	   correspondence.	   At	   the	   University	   of	   Illinois,	  
Appel	   and	   Haken	   controversially	   used	   a	   computer	   to	   create	   one	   of	   these	   constructs.	   In	  
geometry,	  Side	  angle	  side	  and	  angle	  side	  angle	  are	  sufficient	  for	  creating	  one	  of	  these	  constructs	  
for	   triangle	   congruence.	   The	   two-­‐column	   technique	   of	   creating	   these	   constructs	   is	   commonly	  
taught	  in	  geometry.	  These	  constructs	  typically	  end	  with	  a	  square	  or	  Q.E.D.	  at	  the	  end.	  	  For	  the	  
point,	  name	  this	  task	  of	  validating	  a	  mathematical	  theorem.	  	  
ANSWER:	  proof	  
	  
	  
	  
27.	   Kleine-­‐Levin	   syndrome	   is	   characterized	   by	   chronic	   occurences	   of	   this	   process.	   It's	   not	  
appetite-­‐related,	   but	   the	   hormone	   orexin	   or	   hypocretin	   has	   been	   linked	   to	   breaking	   this	  
process.	   The	   suprachiasmatic	   nucleus	   over	   the	   optic	   chiasm	   tract	   breaks	   this	   process	   in	  
response	  to	  sunlight,	  which	  is	  brought	  on	  in	  part	  by	  the	  hormone	  melatonin.	  Apnea	  can	  obstruct	  
and	   rapid	   eye	   movement	   can	   occur	   during	   this	   circadian-­‐rhythm	   regulated	   process.	   For	   the	  
point,	  name	  this	  biological	  process	  fundamental	  to	  most	  animals	  during	  which	  dreams	  occur.	  	  	  
ANSWER:	   sleeping	   [or	   somnolence;	   accept	   answers	   indicating	   sleep	   such	   as	   falling	   asleep;	  
prompt	  on	  answers	  like	  lethargy	  or	  drowsiness	  and	  similar	  answers]	  
	  
28.	   Henry	   Fox	   Talbot's	   Calotype	   was	   a	   version	   of	   this	   process	   that	   made	   use	   of	   gallic	   acid.	  
Thomas	  Wedgwood	  was	  an	  early	  pioneer	  in	  this	  process	  whose	  work	  does	  not	  survive	  due	  to	  
not	  having	  a	  fixing	  agent	  to	  add	  to	  the	  silver	  nitrate.	  Charge	  coupled	  devices	  are	  commonly	  used	  
in	  astronomy	  for	  this	  process	  because	  of	  their	  high	  quantum	  efficiency	  and	  taking	  advantage	  of	  
auto-­‐guiding	  as	  well	  as	  dark	  frame	  subtraction	  to	  create	  a	  less	  noisy	  result.	  An	  early	  form	  of	  this	  
process	  worked	  by	  taking	  advantage	  of	  how	  light	  oxidises	  silver	  grains	  and	  used	  sheets	  of	  metal	  
copper	   coated	   with	   silver	   iodide	   and	   is	   known	   today	   as	   the	   Daguerreotype.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	  
this	  technique	  of	  creating	  images	  from	  captured	  film.	  	  
ANSWER:	  photography	  [accept	  equivalents	  like	  taking	  photos]	  
	  
29.	   A	   displacement	   field	   related	   to	   this	   vector	   quantity	   is	   equal	   to	   the	   polarization	   plus	   this	  
vector	   quantity	   times	   a	   constant.	   The	   curl	   of	   this	   vector	   field	   is	   equal	   to	   the	   negative	   partial	  
derivative	  of	  the	  curl	  of	  magnetic	  vector	  potential.	  Gauss's	  law	  sets	  the	  divergence	  of	  this	  vector	  
field	  equal	  to	  charge	  density	  over	  permittivity.	  In	  Lorentz's	  force	  law,	  this	  field	  is	  multiplied	  by	  
charge,	  as	  its	  strength	  at	  any	  point	  is	  calculated	  as	  force	  divided	  by	  charge.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  
this	  field	  that	  influences	  the	  movement	  of	  charges,	  contrasted	  with	  the	  magnetic	  field.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Electric	  field	  [or	  E-­‐field]	  
	  
30.	   For	   the	   discovery	   of	   how	   semiconductors	   could	   be	   used	   to	   create	   these	   devices,	   Brattain,	  
Bardeen	  and	  Shockley	  were	  rewarded	  the	  1956	  Nobel	  Prize	  in	  Physics.	  This	  device	  is	  similar	  to	  
a	   diode	   but	   has	   three	   layers	   either	   as	   NPN	   or	   PNP.	   The	   two	   main	   flavors	   of	   these	   devices	   are	  
Bipolar	   Junction	   and	   Field	   Effect.	   Integrated	   circuits	   doubled	   the	   amount	   of	   these	   elements	  
every	  year	  according	  to	  Moore's	  law	  prediction.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  elements	  named	  for	  
behaving	  like	  a	  resistor	  that	  can	  transfer	  electrical	  signals.	  	  
ANSWER:	   transistors	   [accept	   MOS	   transistor;	   accept	   MOSFET	   transistor;	   accept	   (Metal-­‐Oxide	  
Semiconductor)	  Field	  Effect	  transistor;	  accept	  Bipolar	  Junction	  transistor]	  	  
	  
	  
Extra	  Tossups	  
31.	  The	  functional	  units	  of	  this	  organ	  can	  communicate	  by	  Pores	  of	  Kohn,	  which	  mature	  at	  the	  
age	   of	   4	   around	   the	   same	   side	   of	   this	   organ's	   canals	   of	   Lambert.	   Angiotensin	   converting	  
enzymes	  not	  produced	  by	  vascular	  endothelium	  are	  predominantly	  found	  in	  the	  circulation	  of	  
these	   organs.	   DPPC	   is	   a	   major	   component	   of	   the	   surfactant	   produced	   by	   these	   organs	   to	  
maintain	   surface	   tension	   with	   the	   atmosphere.	   Gas	   exchange	   occurs	   in	   the	   alveoli	   of	   these	  
organs,	   which	   are	   divided	   into	   five	   distinct	   lobes	   and	   inflate	   through	   contraction	   of	   the	  
diaphragm.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  organs	  responsible	  for	  oxygen	  uptake	  from	  the	  air.	  	  
ANSWER:	  lungs	  	  
	  
32.	   Roger	   Apery	   proved	   the	   sum	   of	   1	   over	   n	   cubed	   from	   1	   to	   infinity	   has	   this	   property,	  
equivalent	  to	  the	  Riemann	  Zeta	  function	  of	  3.	  Thomae's	  function	  is	  continuous	  for	  this	  type	  of	  
number	  which	  it	  outputs	  zero	  for.	  The	  continued	  fraction	  representation	  of	  these	  numbers	  are	  
non-­‐terminating.	  Legendarily,	  Hippasus	  was	  drowned	  for	  telling	  followers	  of	  Pythagoras	  that	  a	  
number	   of	   this	   type	   existed.	   This	   type	   of	   number	   cannot	   be	   represented	   as	   a	   fraction	   with	   an	  
integer	   in	   both	   the	   numerator	   and	   denominator.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   subset	   of	   the	   real	  
numbers	  whose	  decimal	  form	  is	  non-­‐terminating,	  such	  as	  pi	  and	  radical	  2.	  
ANSWER:	  irrational
                2020 National Science Bee – Middle School
                               Final Round
Regulation Questions
1.	   This	   disease	   is	   diagnosed	   with	   a	   hemoglobin	   A1c	   test.	   Along	   with	   polycystic	   ovary	  
syndrome,	   metformin	   is	   commonly	   prescribed	   as	   a	   treatment	   to	   this	   disease.	   The	  
leading	   cause	   of	   blindness	   in	   young	   adults	   is	   this	   disease's	   retinopathy.	   One	   form	   of	   this	  
disease	   occurs	   due	   to	   destruction	   of	   the	   Islets	   of	   Langerhans.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	  
disease	  caused	  due	  to	  insulin	  resistance	  or	  a	  lack	  of	  insulin	  production,	  which	  requires	  
monitoring	  of	  blood	  sugar	  levels.	  	  
ANSWER:	  diabetes	  
	  
2.	   Ozone	   can	   be	   used	   to	   split	   this	   functional	   group	   into	   carboxylic	   acids	   and	   ketones.	   No	  
intermediate	   productions,	   like	   a	   similar	   functional	   group,	   form	   when	   these	   functional	  
groups	   undergo	   halogenation.	   The	   German	   words	   Entgegen	   and	   Zusammen	   lend	   their	  
names	  to	  the	  E	  and	  Z	  symbols	  used	  to	  label	  isomers	  of	  this	  functional	  group.	  The	  general	  
formula	  of	  acyclic	  examples	  of	  these	  hydrocarbons	  have	  formula	  C-­‐n,	  H-­‐2n.	  The	  simplest	  
example	   of	   these	   hydrocarbons	   is	   ethene.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   type	   of	   functional	  
group	  consisting	  of	  a	  carbon	  carbon	  double	  bond.	  	  
ANSWER:	  alkenes	  [or	  olefins]	  
	  
3.	  A	  horizontal	  approach	  to	  the	  most	  well	  known	  characteristic	  of	  this	  construct	  occurs	  
along	   a	   path	   named	   for	   Henyey.	   That	   path	   for	   Henyey	   for	   this	   construct	   can	   be	   followed	  
from	   a	   different	   track	   named	   for	   Hayashi.	   Delta	   Scuti	   and	   SX	   phoenicis	   occupy	   this	  
construct's	  instability	  strip.	  Most	  data	  points	  on	  this	  plot	  are	  along	  what	  is	  referred	  to	  as	  
the	  main	  sequence.	  This	  diagram	  typically	  uses	  temperature	  as	  the	  x-­‐axis	  and	  luminosity	  
as	  the	  y	  axis.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  color-­‐magnitude	  diagram	  named	  for	  Danish	  and	  
American	  astronomers	  used	  for	  stellar	  classification.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Hertzsprung-­‐Russell	  Diagram	  [or	  HR	  diagram]	  
	  
4.	  The	  equation	  "A"	  cosine	  squared	  of	  theta	  plus	  B	  cosine	  of	  theta	  plus	  C	  is	  used	  in	  this	  
technique	  to	  determine	  the	  relation	  between	  dihedral	  torsion	  angles	  and	  the	  J	  coupling	  
constant;	   that	   equation	   is	   the	   Karplus	   equation.	   TMS	   is	   used	   as	   a	   reference	   in	   this	  
technique	   which	   has	   much	   larger	   chemical	   shifts	   for	   its	   Carbon-­‐13	   variant	   than	   the	  
proton	   variant.	   A	   medical	   imaging	   technique	   that	   makes	   use	   of	   this	   method	   requires	   the	  
patient	  to	  not	  have	  any	  metal	  implants	  due	  to	  the	  use	  of	  a	  giant	  magnet.	  For	  the	  point,	  
name	   this	   technique	   which	   makes	   use	   of	   an	   external	   magnetic	   field	   to	   make	   nuclei	  
readings.	  	  
ANSWER:	  nuclear	  magnetic	  resonance	  or	  NMR	  spectroscopy	  
	  
5.	  According	  to	  the	  continuum	  hypothesis,	  there	  is	  no	  set	  with	  cardinality	  between	  this	  
set	   of	   numbers	   and	   the	   natural	   numbers.	   Dedekind	   cuts	   are	   used	   to	   construct	   this	   set	   of	  
numbers	  whose	  uncountability	  was	  proved	  by	  Georg	  Cantor’s	  diagonalization	  argument.	  
This	  type	  of	  number	  between	  0	  and	  1	  is	  uncountably	  infinite.	  The	  union	  of	  irrational	  and	  
rational	  numbers	  produces	  this	  set	  of	  numbers.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  non-­‐complex	  
numbers	  which	  do	  not	  contain	  an	  imaginary	  component.	  	  
ANSWER:	  real	  numbers	  [prompt	  on	  R]	  	  
	  
6.	  In	  the	  United	  States,	  types	  of	  this	  material	  can	  be	  identified	  by	  a	  resin	  identification	  
number	   between	   one	   and	   seven.	   Leo	   Baekeland	   coined	   the	   term	   for	   this	   material	   and	  
invented	   the	   first	   fully	   synthetic	   example	   of	   one,	   bakelite.	   Because	   it	   is	   likely	   an	  
endocrine	  disruptor,	  the	  use	  of	  BPA	  as	  an	  additive	  to	  this	  material	  has	  been	  called	  into	  
question.	   Examples	   of	   this	   material	   include	   polypropylene	   and	   polystyrene.	   For	   the	  
point,	   name	   these	   highly	   malleable	   synthetic	   polymers,	   which	   make	   up	   water	   bottles	  
and	  milk	  jugs.	  	  
ANSWER:	  plastics	  [prompt	  on	  polymers]	  
	  
7.	  This	  language	  handles	  input	  by	  grouping	  letters	  into	  hboxes	  which	  are	  then	  put	  into	  a	  
vbox	   with	   the	   goal	   of	   minimizing	   badness	   between	   lines.	   Leslie	   Lamport	   designed	   an	  
extension	  to	  this	  language	  with	  more	  user-­‐friendly	  macros	  and	  packages.	  Donald	  Knuth	  
designed	   this	   language	   to	   make	   beautiful	   textbooks	   and	   has	   said	   the	   X	   should	   be	  
pronounced	  like	  a	  Scottish	  person	  pronounces	  "Loch."	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  markup	  
language	  whose	  extension	  shares	  its	  spelling	  with	  the	  name	  for	  natural	  raw	  rubber.	  
ANSWER:	  TeX	  [accept	  LaTex]	  
	  
8.	  None	  of	  these	  particles	  are	  formed	  during	  internal	  conversion	  while	  their	  emission	  is	  
represented	  by	  down	  arrows	  on	  Jablonski	  diagrams.	  The	  equation	  for	  these	  bosons	  gave	  
rise	   to	   the	   De	   Broglie	   hypothesis	   and	   is	   equal	   to	   Planck's	   constant	   over	   wavelength.	  
These	   particles	   are	   represented	   by	   curvy	   lines	   on	   Feynman	   diagrams.	   Young's	   double	  
slit	   experiment	   proved	   the	   wave	   nature	   of	   these	   particles.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	  
quantum	  particle	  that	  carries	  the	  electromagnetic	  force	  and	  mediates	  visible	  light.	  	  
ANSWER:	  photons	  
	  
9.	   A	   gradient	   caused	   by	   this	   process	   is	   reversed	   by	   the	   hormone	   ADH.	   This	   process	  
causes	  the	  swelling	  of	  a	  plant’s	  central	  vacuole	  creating	  turgidity.	  In	  general,	  this	  process	  
stabilizes	  solute	  concentrations,	  which	  can	  result	  in	  a	  cell	  becoming	  hyper-­‐	  or	  hypotonic.	  
Pressure	   is	   used	   to	   “reverse”	   this	   process	   in	   a	   desalination	   method.	   Water	   moves	  
through	  a	  semipermeable	  membrane	  during,	  for	  the	  point,	  what	  diffusive	  process?	  
ANSWER:	  osmosis	  [or	  osmotic	  flow;	   prompt	   on	  water	  flow;	   prompt	   on	  water	  balance;	  
prompt	  on	  diffusion]	  
	  
	  
10.	   A	   50/50	   mix	   of	   UDMH	   and	   NTO	   is	   a	   common	   hypergolic	   for	   these	   devices.	   The	  
equation,	   delta-­‐v	   equals	   effective	   exhaust	   velocity	   over	   the	   natural	   logarithm	   of	   initial	  
total	   mass	   over	   final	   total	   mass,	   was	   developed	   from	   Newton's	   second	   law	   for	   these	  
devices	   by	   Soviet	   engineer	   Konstantin	   Tsiolkovsky.	   Oxidizers	   on	   board	   these	   devices	  
allow	   for	   the	   creation	   of	   force	   despite	   the	   presence	   of	   a	   vacuum	   when	   these	   devices	  
travel.	   That	   force	   produced	   by	   these	   devices	   can	   be	   calculated	   by	   the	   thrust	   equation.	  
For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  devices	  that	  help	  propel	  satellites	  into	  space	  
ANSWER:	  rocket	  engines	  [or	  rockets;	  prompt	  on	  engine]	  
	  
11.	  This	  program	  greenlighted	  AS-­‐204	  which	  ended	  when	  a	  fire	  caused	  the	  death	  of	  Ed	  
White,	  Roger	  Chaffee,	  and	  Gus	  Grissom.	  A	  follow-­‐up	  program	  to	  this	  one	  plans	  to	  use	  the	  
Orion	   spacecraft	   to	   set	   up	   a	   station	   called	   Gateway.	   Michael	   Collins	   remained	   in	   the	  
Command	  Module	  during	  the	  11th	  mission	  in	  this	  program,	  which	  landed	  in	  the	  Sea	  of	  
Tranquility.	  The	  follow	  up	  to	  this	  program	  is	  the	  2024	  Artemis	  program.	  For	  the	  point,	  
name	   this	   program	   whose	   11th	   mission	   sent	   Buzz	   Aldrin	   and	   Neil	   Armstrong	   to	   the	  
moon.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Apollo	  program	  	  
	  
12.	  A	  white	  one	  of	  these	  substances	  forms	  in	  the	  result	  of	  a	  double	  replacement	  reaction	  
between	  silver	  nitrate	  and	  sodium	  chloride.	  Double	  displacement	  reactions	  are	  classified	  
as	   this	   type	   of	   reaction	   if	   the	   reaction	   occurs	   in	   an	   aqueous	   solution	   and	   one	   of	   the	  
products	   is	   insoluble.	   Sometimes	   referred	   to	   as	   sediment,	   this	   solid	   component	   sits	  
below	   the	   supernatant.	   Both	   referring	   to	   the	   process	   by	   which	   it	   forms	   and	   the	   solid	  
substance	  itself,	  for	  the	  point,	  is	  what	  solid	  that	  forms	  out	  of	  solution?	  
ANSWER:	   precipitation	   [or	   precipitate;	   prompt	   on	   double	   displacement	   or	   double	  
replacement	  or	  replacement	  before	  "replacement"	  is	  mentioned]	  
	  
13.	  An	  effect	  named	  for	  this	  scientist	  is	  mathematically	  expressed	  as	  the	  magnetic	  flux	  
density,	  times	  the	  path	  length	  times	  Verdet's	  (vayr-­‐DAY)	  constant	  for	  the	  material	  equals	  
the	  angle	  of	  rotation.	  Maxwell	  wrote	  a	  version	  of	  this	  scientist's	  law	  as	  the	  curl	  of	  electric	  
field	  equal	  to	  the	  negative	  partial	  derivative	  of	  the	  magnetic	  field	  with	  respect	  to	  time,	  
where	   the	   negative	   sign	   was	   precursored	   by	   Lenz's	   law.	   This	   scientist's	   law	   describes	  
how	   an	   electromotive	   force	   is	   created	   by	   a	   change	   in	   flux.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	  
English	  scientist	  who	  names	  an	  electromagnetic	  law	  of	  induction.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Michael	  Faraday	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
14.	   A	   set	   of	   zipper-­‐like	   proteins	   that	   help	   transport	   these	   structures	   include	  
synaptobrevin	  and	  SNAP-­‐25	  and	  can	  be	  targeted	  by	  botulinum	  toxin.	  The	  fusion	  of	  these	  
structures	  is	  mediated	  by	  SNARE	  proteins.	  Triskelion	  shaped	  proteins	  that	  form	  a	  cage	  
like	   structure	   around	   these	   structures	   are	   called	   clathrin.	   MPRs	   are	   packed	   onto	   these	  
structures	  so	  that	  they	  can	  be	  recycled	  after	  dropping	  off	  mannose-­‐6-­‐phosphate	  tagged	  
proteins	   to	   the	   lysosome.	   These	   structures	   are	   similar	   to	   micelles	   and	   form	   during	  
endocytosis.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   these	   structures	   important	   in	   cell	   transport	   where	   a	  
liquid	  or	  cytoplasm	  is	  surrounded	  by	  a	  lipid	  bilayer.	  	  
ANSWER:	  vesicles	  
	  
15.	   A	   parameter	   of	   this	   name	   in	   thermodynamics	   is	   equal	   to	   one	   over	   Boltzmann's	  
constant	  times	  temperature.	  Penicillin	  is	  part	  of	  a	  class	  of	  antibiotics	  named	  for	  	  lactam	  
rings	  of	  this	  letter.	  Abnormal	  heart	  rhythms	  can	  be	  treated	  with	  a	  class	  of	  medications	  
named	   [this	   letter]-­‐blockers.	   A	   form	   of	   decay	   named	   for	   this	   letter	   releases	   a	   particle	  
equivalent	  to	  a	  Helium	  nucleus.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  letter	  that	  names	  a	  sheet	  motif	  
common	  in	  protein	  folding	  alongside	  alpha-­‐helices.	  	  
ANSWER:	  beta	  
	  
16.	   The	   coherence	   length	   and	   penetration	   depth	   parameterize	   these	   materials	   in	  
Ginzburg-­‐Landau	   theory.	   This	   material	   is	   separated	   by	   an	   insulator	   at	   a	   Josephson	  
junction,	  which	  gives	  rise	  to	  the	  Josephson	  effect	  where	  Cooper	  pairs	  are	  able	  to	  tunnel	  
across	  the	  barrier.	  John	  Bardeen,	  Leon	  Cooper,	  and	  John	  Robert	  Schrieffer	  developed	  the	  
accurate	  BCS	  theory	  of	  this	  material.	  This	  material	  expels	  magnetic	  fields	  in	  the	  Meissner	  
effect.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   these	   materials	   that	   at	   low	   temperatures	   have	   no	   electrical	  
resistance.	  	  
ANSWER:	   superconductors	   [accept	   Type	   I	   superconductors	   or	   Type	   II	  
superconductors]	  	  
	  
17.	  One	  over	  2i	  times	  quantity	  e	  to	  the	  i	  z	  plus	  or	  minus	  e	  to	  the	  negative	  i	  z	  represents	  
two	   of	   this	   class	   of	   functions	   in	   their	   complex	   form.	   Two	   members	   of	   this	   class	   of	  
functions	   are	   used	   to	   approximate	   all	   periodic	   functions	   through	   the	   Fourier	   series.	   The	  
complex	  numbers	  are	  related	  to	  the	  two	  most	  commonly	  employed	  of	  these	  functions	  by	  
Euler's	   formula.	   The	   unit	   circle's	   radian	   measurement	   is	   commonly	   used	   instead	   of	  
degrees	  when	  plugging	  into	  these	  functions	  to	  find	  the	  ratios	  of	  triangles.	  For	  the	  point,	  
name	  this	  class	  of	  functions	  that	  includes	  the	  cosine	  and	  sine.	  	  
ANSWER:	  trigonometric	  functions	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
18.	   A	   plus	   three	   oxidation	   state	   salt	   derivative	   of	   one	   member	   of	   these	   elements	   is	  
commonly	   used	   as	   an	   MRI	   contrast	   agent.	   Due	   to	   poor	   shielding	   of	   the	   4f	   electrons	   of	  
these	   elements,	   they	   experience	   a	   namesake	   contraction	   in	   atomic	   radius.	   Members	   of	  
this	   group	   of	   elements	   include	   Europium,	   Samarium,	   and	   Ytterbium.	   This	   group	   of	  
elements	  begins	   at	   57	  and	   ends	   at	   71.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  group	  of	  elements	  that	  
sits	  below	  the	  transition	  metals	  on	  the	  periodic	  table	  above	  the	  actinides.	  .	  	  
ANSWER:	  lanthanides	  [accept	  lanthanoids]	  
	  
19.	  This	  species's	  catabolite	  activator	  protein	  is	  controlled	  by	  cyclic	  AMP	  concentration	  
levels	  which	  is	  useful	  for	  controlling	  its	  production	  of	  L-­‐arabinose.	  François	  Jacob	  (Yah	  
cohb)	   and	   Jacques	   Monod	   (Mo	   noh)	   received	   the	   1965	   Nobel	   Prize	   in	   Physiology	   or	  
Medicine	  for	   their	   work	   on	   the	   Lac	   operon	  in	  this	  model	  organism.	  It	  isn't	  S.	  dysenteriae	  
but	   Shiga-­‐like	   toxins	   are	   produced	   by	   serotypes	   of	   this	   organism,	   including	   the	  
enterohemorrhagic	   strain	   O157:H7.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   rod-­‐shaped	   bacteria	   whose	  
pathological	  strains	  in	  recent	  years	  have	  caused	  food	  poisoning	  with	  romaine	  lettuce.	  	  
ANSWER:	  E.	  Coli	  [or	  escherichia	  coli]	  	  
	  
20.	   Containers	   allow	   for	   this	   task	   to	   be	   done	   on	   the	   heap	   using	   pointers	   in	   a	   single	  
operation.	   Bubble	   sort	   works	   by	   checking	   two	   items	   and	   performing	   this	   task	   if	   the	  
larger	  item	  is	  more	  to	  the	  left	  in	  the	  series.	  The	  simplest	  algorithm	  for	  performing	  this	  
task	  requires	  moving	  one	  of	  the	  two	  values	  into	  a	  temporary	  address	  while	  assigning	  the	  
other	  to	  the	  previously	  assigned	  address.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  process	  of	  switching	  
two	  items	  in	  memory.	  	  
ANSWER:	  swapping	  
	  
21.	  The	  separation	  of	  primary	  and	  secondary	  components	  was	  a	  major	  breakthrough	  in	  
the	  Teller-­‐Ulam	  design	  of	  these	  devices.	  The	  two	  main	  designs	  of	  this	  device	  are	  the	  gun-­‐
type	   that	   impacts	   into	   a	   subcritical	   load	   or	   the	   implosion	   type	   where	   the	   outer	   shell	  
collapses	   and	   compresses	   the	   core.	   Uranium-­‐235	   and	   plutonium-­‐239	   are	   radioactive	  
materials	  used	  in	  these	  devices.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  explosive	  devices	  of	  war	  that	  
operate	  via	  fission	  and	  fusion	  reactions.	  	  
ANSWER:	   nuclear	   weapons	   [accept	   thermonuclear	   weapons;	   accept	   hydrogen	  
bomb;	   accept	   atomic	   bomb;	   accept	   H	   bomb;	   accept	   A	   bomb;	   accept	   fusion	   weapon;	  
prompt	   on	   warhead;	   prompt	   on	   nukes	   which	   are	   informal	   terms	   for	   the	   actual	   device;	  
prompt	  on	  weapons]	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
22.	  The	  compressible	  pressure	  coefficient	  due	  to	  movement	  of	  this	  phenomenon	  can	  be	  
calculated	   using	   the	   Prandtl-­‐Glauert	   transformation	   which	   was	   predicted	   to	   reach	   a	  
singularity	   at	   around	   340	   meters	   per	   second.	   The	   Newton-­‐Laplace	   equation	   can	   be	   used	  
to	   calculate	   that	   speed	   of	   this	   phenomenon.	   The	   difference	   in	   frequency	   between	   two	  
waves	   of	   this	   phenomenon	   can	   cause	   beats.	   An	   object	   travelling	   faster	   than	   the	   speed	   of	  
this	  phenomenon	  surpasses	  Mach	  1	  and	  is	  "supersonic."	  	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  wave	  
phenomena	  that	  are	  biologically	  perceived	  by	  ears.	  	  
ANSWER:	  sound	  waves	  [or	  sounds]	  
	  
23.	   In	   this	   coordinate	   system,	   an	   equation's	   number	   of	   petals	   is	   2k	   or	   k	   if	   k	   is	   an	   even	   or	  
odd	   integer.	   	   In	   this	   coordinate	   system,	   the	   first	   parameter	   times	   sine	   of	   the	   second	  
parameter	   results	   in	   a	   horizontal	   line,	   whereas	   swapping	   sine	   for	   cosine	   results	   in	   a	  
vertical	   line.	   The	   first	   parameter	   in	   this	   coordinate	   system	   is	   obtained	   from	   Cartesian	  
coordinates	  by	  calculating	  the	  square	  root	  of	  x	  squared	  plus	  y	  squared	  while	  the	  azimuth	  
in	  this	  coordinate	  system	  can	  be	  obtained	  from	  arctan	  of	  y	  over	  x.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  
this	  2D	  coordinate	  system	  that	  uses	  radius	  and	  theta	  coordinates.	  	  
ANSWER:	  polar	  coordinates	  [accept	  polar	  notation]	  
	  
24.	   Kenneth	   Livak	   introduced	   a	   delta-­‐delta-­‐CT	   method	   for	   determining	   the	   number	   of	  
cycles	  needed	  for	  fluorescence	  from	  dyes	  like	  SYBR	  fluorophores	  to	  be	  detectable.	  In	  this	  
technique,	  an	  eight-­‐tube	  strip	  contains	  the	  sample	  and	  a	  portion	  of	  the	  "master	  mix"	  of	  
dNTPs,	   magnesium	   chloride	   and	   enzymes.	   Kary	   Mullis	   was	   recognized	   with	   the	   1993	  
Nobel	  Prize	  in	  Chemistry	  for	  inventing	  this	  technique	  whose	  real	  time	  variant	  makes	  use	  
of	   TaqMan	   probes.	   Temperature	   is	   cycled	   in	   this	   technique	   during	   Denaturing,	  
Annealing,	  and	  Extension	  phases,	  and	  primers	  are	  used	  to	  extend	  nucleotide	  sequences.	  
For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  technique	  of	  amplifying	  a	  DNA	  sample.	  	  
ANSWER:	  Polymerase	  Chain	  Reaction	  
	  
25.	  NASA	  expects	  to	  discover	  thousands	  of	  these	  objects	  via	  the	  TESS	  mission	  launched	  
in	  2018.	  The	  first	  confirmed	  discovery	  of	  one	  of	  these	  objects	  was	  Pegasi	  51b,	  which	  falls	  
under	   a	   class	   of	   these	   objects	   within	   the	   frost	   line	   known	   as	   "Hot	   Jupiters."	   Before	   being	  
retired	   in	   2018,	   the	   Kepler	   space	   telescope	   discovered	   many	   of	   these	   objects	   by	   the	  
transit	  method	  when	  they	  orbited	  in	  front	  of	  a	  bright	  star.	  If	  they	  exist	  in	  the	  habitable	  
zone,	  these	  objects	  are	  potential	  sources	  for	  life.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  planets	  that	  
circle	  stars	  other	  than	  our	  Sun.	  	  
ANSWER:	  extrasolar	  planets	  [or	  exoplanets]	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
26.	  Early	  sound	  detection	  apparati	  for	  submarines	  made	  use	  of	  either	  magnetostriction	  
transducers	   or	   ultrasonic	   transducers	   made	   with	   materials	   that	   exhibit	   this	   effect.	   The	  
discovery	  of	  this	  effect	  was	  first	  cited	  in	  a	  paper	  which	  described	  it	  as	  "Development	  by	  
compression	   of	   polar	   electricity	   in	   hemihedral	   crystals	   with	   inclined	   faces";	   that	   1880	  
paper	  was	  written	  by	  Pierre	  and	  Jacques	  Curie	  in	  their	  experiments	  on	  crystals	  lacking	  
inversion	  symmetry	  which	  exhibit	  this	  effect	  such	  as	  Quartz	  and	  Rochelle	  salts.	  For	  the	  
point,	   name	   this	   phenomenon	   where	   mechanical	   stress	   causes	   the	   buildup	   of	   electric	  
charge	  in	  a	  material.	  	  
ANSWER:	  piezoelectricity	  [or	  piezoelectric	  effect]	  
	  
27.	  While	  animal	  fats	  are	  an	  alternative	  to	  producing	  Fatty	  Acid	  Methyl	  Esters	  or	  FAME,	  
transesterification	   of	   this	   class	   of	   compounds	   is	   usually	   the	   most	   common	   method	   to	  
produce	  FAME.	  Glycerol	  ester	  of	  wood	  rosin	  is	  a	  potential	  alternative	  to	  a	  modification	  
of	  this	  class	  of	  oils	  used	  to	  prevent	  citrus	  flavors	  from	  emulsifying	  that	  is	  still	  classified	  
as	  "Generally	  Recognized	  as	  Safe"	  despite	  concerns	  of	  bromine	  toxicity.	  Crisco	  was	  the	  
first	  shortening	  made	  by	  hydrogenating	  this	  class	  of	  oils.	  Biodiesel	  is	  any	  fuel	  made	  from	  
reactions	  with	  this	  class	  of	  oils.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  these	  oils	  derived	  from	  plants	  such	  
as	  olive	  and	  soy	  beans.	  	  
ANSWER:	  vegetable	  oil	  [accept	  just	  vegetables	  after	  oil	  is	  read	  ;	  prompt	  on	  oil	  before	  
mentioned;accept	  specific	  vegetable	  oils	  like	  olive	  oil]	  
	  
28.	  A	  stopcock	  is	  used	  to	  control	  the	  rate	  at	  which	  these	  devices	  function	  in	  the	  dropping	  
variety	   of	   this	   lab	   equipment.	   The	   separatory	   variety	   of	   this	   lab	   equipment	   is	   used	   in	  
liquid-­‐liquid	  extraction.	  The	  Buchner	  variety	  allows	  for	  fast	  filtration	  with	  this	  piece	  of	  
lab	   equipment.	   This	   simple	   piece	   of	   plastic,	   glass,	   or	   stainless	   steel	   lab	   equipment	   in	  
wider	  scale	  operations	  typically	  has	  a	  channel	  of	  liquid	  that	  feeds	  into	  the	  wide	  end	  with	  
filter	  paper	  placed	  near	  the	  narrow	  end.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  device	  which	  can	  aid	  in	  
guiding	  liquid	  into	  a	  narrow	  opening	  of	  a	  container.	  	  
ANSWER:	  funnel	  
	  
29.	  Fleischmann	  and	  Pons	  thought	  they	  had	  discovered	  cold	  fusion	  by	  using	  this	  process	  
on	  heavy	  water	  over	  a	  palladium	  substrate.	  The	  Tafel	  equation	  can	  be	  used	  to	  calculate	  
the	   overpotential	   of	   water	   when	   reacted	   over	   a	   platinum	   substrate.	   The	   Hall-­‐Heroult	  
process	   uses	   this	   method	   to	   extract	   aluminum	   from	   aluminum	   oxide.Water	   is	   broken	  
down	  into	  hydrogen	  and	  oxygen	  if	  this	  process	  is	  driven	  at	  the	  correct	  voltage.	  For	  the	  
point,	   name	   this	   process	   of	   producing	   chemical	   reactions	   at	   cathodes	   and	   anodes	   by	  
applying	  a	  direct	  current.	  	  
ANSWER:	  electrolysis	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
30.	  Given	  a	  probability	  density	  function	  f	  of	  x,	  this	  statistic	  for	  the	  distribution	  is	  equal	  to	  
the	  integral	  from	  negative	  infinity	  to	  infinity	  of	  x	  times	  f	  of	  x	  d	  x.	  This	  statistic	  converges	  
to	   the	   expected	   value	   of	   a	   distribution	   according	   to	   the	   law	   of	   large	   numbers.	   One	  
Pythagorean	  type	  of	  this	  statistic	  can	  be	  obtained	  by	  multiplying	  all	  the	  numbers	  in	  a	  set	  
together	  and	  taking	  the	  n-­‐root	  where	  n	  is	  the	  total	  number	  of	  data	  points.	  Types	  of	  this	  
statistic	  include	  geometric,	  harmonic,	  and	  arithmetic.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  statistic,	  a	  
measure	  of	  the	  average	  from	  a	  set	  of	  numbers.	  	  
ANSWER:	  mean	  	  [before	  mentioned:	  accept	  expected	  value	  or	  ev,	  prompt	  on	  average]	  

Extra	  Questions	  
31.	  As	  a	  means	  for	  taking	  measurements	  from	  this	  organ,	  Willem	  Einthoven	  invented	  a	  
namesake	  Triangle	  that	  runs	  from	  the	  wrists	  to	  the	  left	  ankle.	  That	  breakthrough	  helped	  
him	  win	  the	  1924	  Nobel	  Prize	  in	  Medicine	  or	  Physiology	  for	  a	  galvanometer	  instrument	  
designed	  for	  this	  organ.	  The	  Frank-­‐Starling	  law	  describes	  how	  increase	  in	  volume	  leads	  
to	  an	  increase	  in	  stroke	  volume	  from	  this	  organ.	  A	  namesake	  cycle	  of	  this	  organ	  can	  be	  
measured	   from	   two	   consecutive	   R	   peaks,	   which	   makes	   up	   the	   largest	   spike	   on	   a	   QRS	  
complex	  measured	  from	  this	  organ	  on	  an	  ECG.	  This	  organ	  cycles	  between	  filling	  diastolic	  
phases	  and	  contracting	  systolic	  phases.	  For	  the	  point,	  name	  this	  organ	  that	  serves	  as	  a	  
pump	  circulating	  blood	  throughout	  the	  body.	  	  
ANSWER:	  heart	  
	  
32.	   This	   material	   in	   its	   molten	   form	   is	   fed	   through	   an	   "isopipe"	   in	   a	   fusion	   process	  
developed	  by	  the	  Corning	  company.	  In	  that	  industrial	  process,	  this	  material	  is	  then	  cut	  
from	   a	   "mother	   sheet"	   to	   be	   fed	   into	   an	   ion-­‐exchange	   process	   to	   form	   this	   material's	  
sturdy	  "Gorilla"	  variety.	  Using	  random	  network	  theory,	  W.H.	  Zachariasen	  developed	  four	  
empirical	   rules	   for	   this	   material.	   A	   layer	   of	   titanium	   dioxide	   added	   to	   this	   material	  
creates	   a	   "self-­‐cleaning"	   variety.	   The	   properties	   of	   polymers	   drastically	   change	   after	  
undergoing	  a	  transition	  named	  for	  this	  material.	  These	  vitreous	  solids	  are	  often	  formed	  
from	  the	  rapid	  quenching	  of	  molten	  material.	  Natural	  varieties	  of	  this	  material	  include	  
obsidian.	   For	   the	   point,	   name	   this	   amorphous	   crystalline	   material	   that	   can	   be	   formed	  
from	  the	  silica	  in	  sand.	  	  
ANSWER:	  glass	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                              Round 3



                                             Round 3
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Panama disease is characterized by the borders of leaves turning this color. This is the color




                                                                       T
of the pigments lead iodide and cadmium sulfide. The Aedes aegypti mosquito spreads fever named for
this color. Instability or reactivity is denoted by this color on an NFPA diagram. In a flame test, sodium
burns this color and Urania is also called [this color]-cake. For the point, name this color of ripe bananas.
ANSWER: yellow

(Tossup 2) Subsurface oceans of this molecule exist on Ganymede, Enceladus, and Europa. In 2015,
NASA confirmed evidence of this molecule in Martian perchlorate salts. It is found under the carbon
dioxide ice cap at Mars’s south pole. Along with rocks and dust this molecule’s frozen form makes up




eczema and acne?
                      AF
comets. For the point, name this substance thought to be required for alien life since it covers about 70%
of the Earth’s surface.
ANSWER: water (or H-2-O; accept water vapor or water ice)


(Tossup 3) The arrector pili are smooth muscles found in this organ. Langerhans cells and Meissner
corpuscles are found in this organ. The stratum spinosum of this organ is composed of keratinocytes.
Exocrine glands in this organ produce sebum. Melanin provides this organ with pigmentation. The dermis
and epidermis are part of, for the point, what largest organ in the human body that can be affected by

ANSWER: skin


(Tossup 4) Ptolemy’s book on an aspect of this phenomenon describes within it seven tonoi. This
phenomenon in the West is centered around sets like Dorian, Phrygian and Lydian. This phenomenon is
vertically divided into harmony and horizontally divided into melody. For the point, name this art form
transmitted via sound.
DR
ANSWER: music (accept harmonics before “harmony”)


(Tossup 5) This programming language uses “duck typing” to denote objects. The site Reddit is entirely
coded in this language, which uses namesake “Num” and “Sci” libraries for computing. This language
invented by Guido van Rossum uses whitespace for readability, and has variables called “spam” and
“eggs.” Web servers often use, for the point, what programming language named for a British comedy
troupe with a “serpentine” name?
ANSWER: Python


(Tossup 6) The change in this quantity associated with vaporization is around 10.5 R according to
Trouton’s rule. Boltzmann’s definition of this quantity, carved on his gravestone, sets it equal to k times
the natural logarithm of microstates. The second law of thermodynamics states that the total amount of
this quantity never decreases. For the point, name this measure of disorder in a system, symbolized S.
ANSWER: entropy


                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                              Round 3


(Tossup 7) The phi and psi [“sigh”] dihedral angles of this group of molecules are plotted against each
other on a Ramachandran plot. Molecules like dopamine and adrenaline are derived from an aromatic one
of these compounds called tyrosine. AUG encodes one of these molecules called methionine. Peptide bonds
form between two of these molecules. For the point, name these building blocks of protein.
ANSWER: amino acids




                                                                       T
(Tossup 8) To define a unit for this quantity, scientists measure the hyperfine transition frequency of
cesium. The “arrow” of this quantity is its “asymmetry,” which is a property of entropy. The derivative
of charge with respect to this quantity gives the current. Power can be calculated by dividing work by
change in this quantity. Distance equals rate multiplied by this quantity. For the point, name this quantity
that can be measured in seconds.
ANSWER: time




ANSWER: temperature
                      AF
(Tossup 9) This quantity names a maximum reached between the Paleocene and Eocene periods. Snow
causes this quantity to fall as albedo increases resulting in more sunlight being reflected instead of
absorbed. Density differences between salinity and this quantity drive the thermohaline circulation. For
the point, name this quantity on the rise with global warming, measured in Fahrenheit and Celsius.



(Tossup 10) This constant was once measured using a sphere of ultrapure silicon-28. This constant is
equal to Faraday’s constant divided by the elementary charge. This number can be defined as the gas
constant divided by Boltzmann’s constant. This constant was once defined as the number of atoms in 12
grams of pure carbon-12. For the point, name this constant that is the number of particles in a mole,
approximately 6.022 times 10 to the 23rd.
ANSWER: Avogadro’s number


(Tossup 11) For the formation of this material, Hans Jenny developed a five-factor state equation
DR
memorized with the mnemonic CLORPT. Aeolian processes can form a type of this material called Loess
[LOH ess]. Horizons of this material are separated into O, A, B, C, and R classifications. Humus is any
organic matter deposited in this material. Sand, silt, and clay make up, for the point, what type of
sediment that nourishes plants?
ANSWER: soil (accept dirt; accept earth; prompt on “clay”)


(Tossup 12) Uneven distribution of a substance in these cells is termed telolecithal [teLOh less uh THuhl],
which leads to their meroblastic cleavage. The follicular phase and luteal phase are parts of a process that
releases this type of cell. Polar bodies are formed during oogenesis, which produces these cells. These cells
are arrested in prophase I in the ovaries. For the point, name these female sex cells fertilized by sperm
that may contain yolk.
ANSWER: egg cells (or ovum)




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                               Round 3


(Tossup 13) A measurement device for this quantity uses a rubber bulb and is named for Karl Friedrich
Mohr. Titrations can also be referred to as an analysis named for this extensive property, which is
measured using a burette. This quantity is determined by reading the point at the bottom of a meniscus.
For the point, name this quantity, which can be measured in labs using graduated cylinders in units of
milliliters.
ANSWER: volume




                                                                       T
(Tossup 14) The Heaviside step function of any of these numbers is zero. The norm of a vector can
never equal one of these numbers, and defining the constant i extends the square root function to these
numbers. These numbers were first described during the Han Dynasty, and the absolute value of any
number is never one of these numbers. For the point, identify these numbers, which are found to the left
of zero on the number line.
ANSWER: negative numbers




                      AF
(Tossup 15) This element is the cation in an ethylene-containing compound, Zeise’s salt. A non-nucleophilic
base, the tert-butoxide of this element, is commonly used to favor E2 eliminations. A form of radioactive
dating relies on the decay of this element’s isotope-40 into argon. This element is found directly above
rubidium on the periodic table and this element was first isolated from potash. For the point, name this
alkali metal found in bananas and with the symbol K.
ANSWER: potassium (prompt on K)


(Tossup 16) The cuckoo bird is known as a “brood” type of these organisms. Apicomplexa is a large
phylum of eukaryotes of this type that includes the protist Plasmodium. A tropical fungus that acts as
one of these organisms can alter the behavior of ants. It’s not a mutation, since organisms in a symbiotic
relationship with them are harmed. For the point, name these organisms that target hosts to gain benefits,
examples of which include tapeworms and leeches.
ANSWER: parasite (accept parasitism)
DR
(Tossup 17) Iridescent PSCs are known as “nacreous” types of these objects. A cellular “mammatus”
type of these objects may form with anvil shaped ones. Silver iodide and dry ice are used to “seed” these
objects with their namesake “condensation nuclei.” Jet engine exhaust can produce artificial types of
these objects called contrails. Classifications of these objects include cirrus, stratus, and cumulus. For the
point, name these fluffy-looking objects in the sky made of water.
ANSWER: clouds


(Tossup 18) Deuterium and helium were made in a nucleosynthesis named after this event. he theory
underpinning this event relies on the universe being homogenous and isotropic by the cosmological
principle. The existence of cosmic microwave background radiation supports this theory. This event was
followed by cosmic inflation. For the point, name this theory that the universe exploded out from one
infinitely dense singularity.
ANSWER: Big Bang theory



                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                            Round 3


(Tossup 19) The German firm Badische Aniline & Soda Fabrik outpaced the Allies in phosgene production,
critical in creating this weapon. The Italians broke the Geneva Protocol of 1925 by using this weapon in
the Second Ethiopian War. The first use of this chemical weapon was at the Battle of Ypres [EEP] during
WWI. For the point, name this weapon made of noxious fumes with “Mustard ‘’ and “Chlorine” variants.
ANSWER: Poison Gas




                                                                     T
(Tossup 20) NMDA and AMPA receptors in these cells help them undergo long-term potentiation.
Multiple sclerosis disrupts the ability of these cells to send action potentials. Grey matter is mainly
composed of the bodies of these cells, while the color of white matter comes from the myelin sheath that
surrounds their axons. Electrical signals cross the synapses of, for the point, what cells that make up the
spinal cord and brain?
ANSWER: neurons (or nerve cells)




rotten eggs.
                     AF
(Tossup 21) This element sits across from a double-bonded oxygen atom in the ring structure of Biotin.
Arsenic and this element are found in orpiment and realgar. The Frasch process pumps superheated water
underground to extract this element. Thioethers and thiols both contain this element. This element is
used in vulcanization to cross-link rubber. For the point, name this solid yellow compound that smells like

ANSWER: sulfur (prompt on S)


(Tossup 22) Theodor Leber names two diseases affecting this organ, one of which is his namesake
congenital amaurosis. Drusen in this organ are an early sign of macular degeneration. Aqueous and
vitreous humor are found in this organ, which contains rods and cones in the retina. Cataracts can form
in the lens of this organ, which uses vitamin A. Irises and pupils are found in, for the point, what paired
organs responsible for vision?
ANSWER: eyes
DR
(Tossup 23) This element’s hyperfine transition produces the 21-centimeter line. Hydrazine contains two
nitrogen atoms and two atoms of this element. Bonds named for this element exist between two antiparallel
strands of DNA and form between this element and oxygen, fluorine, or nitrogen. The antiparticle of
this element consists of a positron and antiproton. For the point, name this lightest element with atomic
number 1.
ANSWER: hydrogen


(Tossup 24) One queen in this modern-day country died due to an abscess after an early attempt at
tooth extraction. The wheel was introduced to this country during its Second Intermediate Period by the
Hyksos people. The engineering prowess of civilization in this modern-day country resulted in the Temple
of Amun at Karnak and the Colossi of Memnon. For the point, name this country that produced the
Great Pyramid of Giza.
ANSWER: ancient Egypt (accept Egyptians)




                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                               Round 3


(Tossup 25) To avoid chromatic aberrations, Isaac Newton invented telescopes that work based on this
process. At the critical angle, the “total internal” type of this process occurs, which is used in fiber-optic
cables. During this process, the incident angle of the light ray before this process occurs equals the angle
after this process occurs. For the point, name this process in which light bounces off of shiny surfaces like
mirrors.
ANSWER: reflection (accept word forms like reflecting; do not accept “refraction”)




                                                                       T
(Tossup 26) Every simply connected closed volume is homeomorphic to one of these shapes according
to the Poincaré conjecture, the only Millenium Problem to be proven thus far. Geographic coordinates
are used to describe these shapes, whose surface area equals four pi times the square of their radius.
For the point, identify these shapes, the set of all points in 3D equidistant from a given point which are
exemplified by basketballs.
ANSWER: spheres




ANSWER: coral reef s
                      AF
(Tossup 27) In these ecosystems, single-celled dinoflagellates called zooxanthellae [ZOO-zan-thuh-LAY]
live in symbiosis with Anthozoans. Atolls are a type of these ecosystems, and there is also a “fringing”
type. Bleaching of these ecosystems causes organisms in them to lose color. Global warming is negatively
impacting these systems because they are composed of calcium carbonate. For the point, name these
marine ecosystems exemplified by the Australian Great Barrier one.



(Tossup 28) The speed of this phenomenon is described by the Beaufort scale and measured by
an anemometer. An example of the prevailing easterly example of this phenomenon was crucial to
early maritime transportation and are the “trade” example of this phenomenon. The presence of this
phenomenon results in an apparent decrease in temperature, its namesake “chill.” For the point, name
this movement of air from high pressure areas to low pressure areas.
ANSWER: wind
DR
(Tossup 29) MASCS was designed to study the exosphere and surface of this planet. The first flyby of this
planet was made possible with the 10th Mariner mission. Two spacecrafts on ESA-JAXA’s BepiColombo
are en route to this planet. The first probe to orbit this planet, MESSENGER, crashed into it in 2015.
One day on this planet takes 59 Earth days, but this planet zips around the sun in merely 88 days. For
the point, name this smallest planet and the one closest to the sun.
ANSWER: Mercury


(Tossup 30) When the magnitude of this force and drag are the same, an object reaches terminal velocity.
This force is proportional to the product of two masses over the square of the distance between them. The
acceleration due to this force on Earth is approximately 9.8 meters per second squared. For the point,
name this force which Newton apocryphally discovered when an apple fell on his head.
ANSWER: gravity




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                             Round 3


Extra

(Tossup 1) For computers, a common abbreviation using these four letters describes processor speed,
total RAM, and other features. These four letters begin a word used with “broad” to describe antibiotics
effective against a wide range of bacterias. A technique that studies radiation’s interaction with matter




                                                                      T
using frequency begins with these four letters. For the point, name these four letters that begin “troscopy”
techniques.
ANSWER: spec (accept spectrum; accept spectroscopy)

(Tossup 2) One of these substances named for Robert Grubbs containing ruthenium is used in olefin
metathesis. Fuel cell membranes use plastic black as one of these substances. Toxic emissions from cars
can be reduced using a “converter” named for these substances. These substances do not affect chemical
equilibrium and are not consumed during a reaction, but they do lower the activation energy. For the

ANSWER: catalysts


                     AF
point, name these substances that increase the rate of reactions.
DR

                                                  Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                               Round 1



                                             Round 1
Regulation

(Tossup 1) An assumption of this theory is that differential fitness is heritable. The mechanism of this




                                                                       T
theory was independently discovered by Alfred Russel Wallace. Analogous structures are created in the
convergent form of this process, and genetic variation is a prerequisite for this process to occur. For the
point, name this theory about inherited changes in populations over time that was explained by Charles
Darwin in On the Origin of Species.
ANSWER: evolution (accept natural selection)

(Tossup 2) Polygonal columns of this type of rock are found in the Giant’s Causeway. Bowen’s reaction
series diagrams minerals that form this type of rock. Ultramafic, mafic, and felsic are classifications of


and metamorphic.

                      AF
these rocks based on their silicon dioxide content. Basalt and pumice are examples of this type of rock
that form from magma or lava cooling. For the point, name this class of rocks contrasted with sedimentary

ANSWER: igneous rock (accept basalt before mentioned, accept extrusive)


(Tossup 3) The largest molecule known to exhibit wave-particle duality contains 60 atoms of this element.
An allotrope of this element with a hexagonal lattice first found in meteorites is called lonsdaleite. Another
allotrope of this element comes in “single-walled” and “multiwalled” forms; those are their namesake
“nanotubes.” Graphite, graphene, and diamond are all made of this element. For the point, name this
element that forms the basis of organic chemistry, symbolized C.
ANSWER: carbon (prompt on C, accept buckminsterfullerene or buckyball in the first line]


(Tossup 4) Both forms of this quantity are conserved under translational and rotational invariance
according to Noether’s theorem. Unlike energy, the linear form of this quantity is conserved during
collisions. The angular form of this quantity can be obtained as the radius cross the linear form of this
DR
quantity. L is used to represent the angular form of this quantity. For the point, name this product of
mass and velocity, quantification of an object’s tendency to stay in motion.
ANSWER: momentum (accept linear momentum; accept angular momentum)


(Tossup 5) Projections of the cell membrane within this tissue are called T-tubules. The tetanus toxin
blocks neurons attached to this tissue. The breakdown of this tissue releases large amounts of myoglobin
into the bloodstream. A “power stroke” cycle allows for the contraction of this tissue via the interaction
between myosin and actin. For the point, name this type of tissue whose “skeletal” type makes up the
diaphragm and biceps.
ANSWER: muscles (accept smooth muscles; accept skeletal muscles)




                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                               Round 1


(Tossup 6) By studying the rotation curves of these systems, Vera Rubin developed their rotation
problem. SBc and E3 are classifications of these systems which lie on a “tuning fork” created by Edwin
Hubble. “Barred” and “unbarred” are classifications of the “spiral” type of these systems. Examples of
these systems include Triangulum and Andromeda. For the point, name these systems of stars exemplified
by the Milky Way.
ANSWER: galaxies (or galaxy)




                                                                       T
(Tossup 7) Part of the Collatz conjecture concerns tripling odd numbers and adding this number to the
result. This number is the determinant of every identity matrix, and this is the only number repeated
in the Fibonacci sequence. This number equals the cosine of zero, and this positive integer is its own
reciprocal. For the point, identify this number, the multiplicative identity, meaning it solves equations like
2x equals 2.
ANSWER: one (or unity)




nucleus.
                      AF
(Tossup 8) Lise Meitner found that a “core” one of these particles gets removed during the Auger
effect. In the photoelectric effect, photons hitting metals cause the emission of these particles. Imagining
a delocalized “sea” of these particles can explain why metals are conductive. The antiparticle of this
subatomic particle is the positron. For the point, name this negatively charged particle that orbits the

ANSWER: electrons


(Tossup 9) Inward and outward curvatures of this structure are respectively called lordosis [“LORE”
doh sis] and kyphosis [kee - FO - sis]. Unbalanced pressure on cartilage within this structure can cause a
type of hernia called a “slipped disc.” Fused bones called the sacrum and coccyx make up the end of this
structure, which is affected by scoliosis [SCOH lee OH sis] and can be manipulated by chiropractors. For
the point, name this bony structure in the back consisting of 33 vertebrae.
ANSWER: spine (accept backbone or spinal column or vertebral column do not accept “spinal cord”)
DR
(Tossup 10) Henri Becquerel [BECK-uh-RELL] and two people with this surname shared the 1903 Nobel
Prize in Physics. This is the last name of a physicist who won two Nobel Prizes for advancing the study
of radioactivity and discovering Radium and Polonium. For the point, name this last name of Polish and
French scientists Marie and Pierre.
ANSWER: Curie (accept Marie Curie, Pierre Curie, Jacques Curie)


(Tossup 11) The chloride of this element is used in the saturated calomel electrode. Thiols bond tightly
to compounds of this element, so they are also named for “capturing” this element. Alloys that include
this element are called amalgams. This element is bonded to sulfur in its most common ore cinnabar.
This toxic element was used in early barometers and thermometers. For the point, name this metal that
is liquid at room temperature and has symbol Hg.
ANSWER: mercury (or Hg before mention)




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                             Round 1


(Tossup 12) In dynamic systems theory, a space described by this word represents the possible states
a system can enter. Pressure changes the temperature required for transitions between these states as
described by the Clausius-Clapeyron [clow see us clap uh ron] equation. Sublimation and deposition are
transitions between two of these states. For the point, name these states such as solid, liquid, and gas.
ANSWER: phases (accept phase space)




                                                                      T
(Tossup 13) According to the solution to the Basel problem, summing one over n squared over every
positive integer returns this number squared over six. e to the power of i times this number is equal to
negative one according to Euler’s identity and the area of a circle is given by this number times the radius
squared. For the point, name this value, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter which is
approximately 3.14.
ANSWER: pi




ANSWER: coal
                     AF
(Tossup 14) The largest deposit of this material in the United States is located in the Powder River
Basin of Wyoming and Montana. Anthracite and bituminous are considered higher quality forms of this
material whose lower quality forms include lignite and peat. Burning this material makes up 39% of the
U.S.’s electricity. For the point, name this combustible, sedimentary black rock used as a fuel source.



(Tossup 15) Naphthalene [NAFF thuh LEEN] and anthracene [AN thruh SEEN] contain two and three
units of this compound, which can be modified to form phenol [FEE nol] or toluene [TALL u EEN]. This
molecule’s four-times-one-plus-two conjugated electrons obey Hückel’s rule, making it aromatic. When
fully hydrogenated, this molecule forms cyclohexane. Kekule discovered the structure of this molecule
based on the image of a snake biting its own tail. For the point, name this planar molecule with formula
C6H6.
ANSWER: benzene (prompt on C6H6)
DR
(Tossup 16) Dactyl is a sattelite of one of these bodies named 243 Ida. They make up the Jovian
Trojans, which orbit in Jupiter’s Lagrange points. Gaps where these objects are not found are named
after Kirkwood. One of the largest of these bodies is called Vesta which is found in a region between Mars
and Jupiter. For the point, name these astronomical bodies that make up a namesake “belt” in the solar
system.
ANSWER: asteroids


(Tossup 17) While improving radar during World War II, John Randall made common use of this device
possible with improvements to the cavity magnetron. The “Radarange” was the first modern one of these
devices invented by Percy Spencer after noticing the magnetron had melted a chocolate bar in his pocket.
These things generally operate in the range of 700 watts to 1200 watts. For the point, name this device
used to heat up food with a part of the spectrum between radio and infrared.
ANSWER: microwave oven (do not accept or prompt on “oven”)




                                                  Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                             Round 1


(Tossup 18) Phosphate groups are added to this compound by the enzyme hexokinase. Individual units
of this molecule make up the branched polymers amylopectin [am-UH-lo-PECK-tuhn] and glycogen [GLY
co ZHen]. Pyruvate is formed from the breakdown of this carbohydrate during glycolysis. Combining this
molecule with fructose forms sucrose. For the point, name this simple sugar with formula C6H12O6 that
is the main product of photosynthesis.
ANSWER: glucose (accept dextrose)




                                                                      T
(Tossup 19) Two of these objects merging resulted in the first recorded instance of gravitational waves
by LIGO. Roger Penrose proposed extracting energy from the ergospheres of these objects. They lose
mass through Hawking radiation, and a supermassive one exists at the center of our galaxy. For the point,
name these astronomical bodies that have a gravitational singularity so strong that light cannot escape
past their event horizon.
ANSWER: black holes




                     AF
(Tossup 20) A type of erosion caused by this substance is called wedging. Névé [NAY-VAY] is younger
than another type of substance called firn. Bubbles trapped in “cores” of this substance allow scientists to
determine past atmospheric composition. The ablation of this substance is called calving and can happen
from crevasses. This substance forms structures that leave eskers and moraines. For the point, name this
cold substance that forms glaciers.
ANSWER: water ice [accept frost, snow, icebergs, or glacier before mention]


(Tossup 21) Francois Magendie first illustrated one form of this unit by running an experiment on a
three-year-old dog. This unit of energy is equal to 4.184 Joules as it is defined using the specific heat of
water. This unit is described as “empty” when providing little additional nutrition to the body. A gram
of fat has a value of nine for this unit. Grams of protein and carbohydrates both have a value of four for
this unit. For the point, name this unit used to count energy intake by food.
ANSWER: calories (accept empty calories)
DR
(Tossup 22) In a reaction named for Fischer, carboxylic acid and one of these compounds react to form
an ester. Salt and one of these compounds added to a test tube can cause DNA to precipitate out of
solution. The “wood” type of this compound can cause blindness if ingested. These compounds have a
hydroxyl group, or -OH. For the point, name this group of compounds that include methanol and ethanol.
ANSWER: alcohols [accept hydroxyls before mention]


(Tossup 23) Hydrolysis of this compound is required by ABC transporters. In the body, this compound
is typically complexed with a plus 2 magnesium ion. Oligomycin A can inhibit the Fo [F-oh] subunit of a
synthase that generates this compound. That synthase works on a rotary motor mechanism. This molecule
is primarily produced during oxidative phosphorylation. Glycolysis begins by expending two units of this
molecule. For the point, name this energy currency produced primarily by mitochondria.
ANSWER: ATP (or adenosine triphosphate)




                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                              Round 1


(Tossup 24) John Logie Baird gave the first demonstration of this technology using moving silhouettes on
a Nipkow disk. CASIO pioneered the portable use of this technology. NTSC and Phase Alternating Line
are two color encoding systems for this technology that were popularized in the 1950s. American inventor
Charles Frances Jenkins pioneered the creation of this technology with his paper on “Motion Pictures by
Wireless.” For the point, name this technology used to watch cable channels, commonly abbreviated to
TV.




                                                                       T
ANSWER: television (accept TV before mentioned)


(Tossup 25) Dissolved amounts of this gas are detected using the Winkler test. This gas’s “triplet” form
is paramagnetic due to unpaired electrons in its MO diagram. This gas reacts with hydrocarbons in
combustion reactions. Electrolysis of water produces hydrogen and this other diatomic gas. For the point,
name this gas that makes up 21% of Earth’s atmosphere which is absorbed in the lungs for respiration.
ANSWER: oxygen gas (accept O2 )




ANSWER: paper
                      AF
(Tossup 26) The Fourdrinier Brothers went bankrupt after inventing a device that produces this product
after Tsar Nicholas I failed to patronize them. Tang soldiers captured at the Battle of Talas likely
introduced this innovation to the Middle East. The Han eunuch Cai Lun invented this technology by
mixing hemp waste with bamboo and mulberry bark. For the point, name this Chinese discovery with
predecessors like the Egyptian papyrus.



(Tossup 27) This macromolecule is replicated in a process that involves topoisomerase and helicase. This
material is formed from nucleotides like thymine and adenine. Watson and Crick won their Nobel prize
for describing the shape of this molecule. For the point, name this material that contains the genetic code
and is shaped like a double helix.
ANSWER: DNA (or deoxyribonucleic acid)
DR
(Tossup 28) Seiches [SAY-shes] are a type of these objects that forms in a semi-enclosed area. The length
of the fetch that causes these objects partially determines their size. The Coriolis force generates the
Rossby type of these objects. Spilling, plunging, and collapsing are classifications of the “breaker” type of
these entities. Gravity is the restoring force of these entities generated by wind. For the point, name these
oscillations of water that occur in the ocean.
ANSWER: waves


(Tossup 29) A Lineweaver-Burk plot graphs the activity of these molecules which are described by
parameters such as Vmax and Km in Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Allosteric inhibition regulates these
proteins. Emil Fischer’s “lock-and-key” model explains the binding of substrates at the active sites of
these proteins, which are often named with the suffix “-ase”. For the point, name these biological catalysts
that speed up metabolic reactions.
ANSWER: enzymes




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021                                                             Round 1


(Tossup 30) The angle of repose is the arctangent of a value representing this force. This force is
independent of the surface area according to Amontons’ second law. The amount of this force is calculated
by multiplying an object’s normal force and the coefficient of this phenomenon symbolized mu. This force
comes in static, rolling, and sliding forms. For the point, name this force that resists motion.
ANSWER: friction




                                                                      T
Extra

(Tossup 1) Cells named after this color are called erythrocytes. For humans, the longest wavelength cone
primarily sees this color. Although they can vary greatly, algal blooms are sometimes called “tides” of this
color. Litmus paper turns this color in acidic conditions. Rashes caused by chickenpox are this color. Iron
causes hemoglobin to take, for the point, what color of blood cells contrasted with white blood cells?
ANSWER: red



                     AF
(Tossup 2) These five letters begin the number that describes the total number of colors needed for a
graph such that no two adjacent vertices share the same color. The main additive in stainless steel to
iron is an element that begins with these five letters. These five letters begin element number 24. For the
point, name these five letters that begin a web browser produced by Google and “osomes” of DNA.
ANSWER: chrom (accept chromium; accept chromatic number; accept chromosomes; accept chrome)
DR

                                                  Page 6
                                                              Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021 Finals



                                                 Finals
Regulation

    (Tossup 1) These entities can be AVL or red-black, which are both self-balancing. Quercus and Prunus are
  genera of these entities. The molecular clock assumption can be used to construct the “phylogenetic” type of
these entities. In computer science, data structures named for these entities are connected acyclic graphs, and
                       their “binary” type is easily searched. Sycamore and beech are examples of, for the point,
what plants that include maples?
ANSWER: trees (accept shrubs or oaks or other trees)

(Tossup 2) The pair-instability type of these events occurs in stars with low metallicity. Bursts of neutrinos are
emitted from the Ia [one-A] type of these events, which occurs when a white dwarf star exceeds 1.4 solar
masses, known as the Chandrasekhar limit. The core-collapse types of these events can lead to the r-process,
in which atomic nuclei heavier than iron are created. For the point, name these events in which a star explodes.
ANSWER: supernovae


(Tossup 3) The Einstein-Smoluchowski equation describes this behavior. The rate of this process is related
to molar mass in Graham’s law. The flux of this process is proportional to the gradient of phi by Fick’s first law.
When water undergoes this process due to a semipermeable membrane, it is called osmosis. For the point,
name this process in which particles move from areas of higher concentration to areas of lower concentration.
ANSWER: diffusion (accept osmosis before mentioned, accept effusion)


(Tossup 4) This body of water’s precursor was Iapetus. In this body of water, John Tuzo Wilson discovered
cycles of opening and closing seafloor. Of the five ocean basins, this one has the highest salinity. After the
usual list of names was exhausted for this ocean, the Greek alphabet was used to denote the names of tropical
cyclones in this ocean’s basin in 2020. For the point, name this second-largest ocean bounded to the east by
Europe and the west by North and South America.
ANSWER: Atlantic Ocean


(Tossup 5) Improper versions of this protein can lead to thalassemia. The behavior of this protein in acidic
conditions is characterized by the Bohr effect. This protein contains porphyrin rings with central iron atoms.
This protein includes two alpha and two beta subunits. Sickle-cell anemia occurs due to a mutation in this
protein. For the point, name this protein that transports oxygen in red blood cells and contains heme groups.
ANSWER: hemoglobin (or Hb)




                                                     Page 1
                                                              Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021 Finals


(Tossup 6) At this university’s Ryerson Lab, Robert Millikan conducted his oil drop experiment to measure
elementary electrical charge. Enrico Fermi built the world’s first nuclear reactor under this university’s
squash court stands. For the point, name this Illinois research university in Hyde Park. ANSWER: University
of Chicago
(Tossup 7) The lowered activity of this gland is present in Hashimoto’s disease. Parafollicular cells or C cells
in this organ secrete calcitonin. The pituitary gland produces TSH to stimulate this other gland in its
neuroendocrine axis. Overactivity of this gland can be caused by the autoimmune Graves’ disease. Goiter is
the swelling of this gland when the body is deficient in period iodine For the point, name this
butterfly-shaped gland located in the neck.
ANSWER: thyroid gland (do not accept parathyroid gland)


(Tossup 8) The gamma function is a generalization of this function. The terms in Taylor series involve this
function in the denominator. This function applied to zero is defined to be one and this function describes the
number of permutations of a given set of objects. For the point, multiplying a given integer with each positive
integer below it - like 4 times 3 times 2 times 1 - defines what function symbolized by an exclamation point?
ANSWER: factorial


(Tossup 9) The longest year by year record of concentrations of this molecule in the middle troposphere is
plotted on the Keeling curve. In the atmosphere, this molecule is the major contributor to an effect where the
sun’s rays are absorbed by the atmosphere rather than reflecting back out into space. The majority of
greenhouse emissions are caused by, for the point, what molecule referred to as “dry ice” in solid form?
ANSWER: carbon dioxide (accept CO2)


(Tossup 10) The IEEE 802.15.1 was the last standardization of this technology. Jim Kardach developed this
technology to allow mobile phones to communicate with computers. This technology works via short-linked
radio wave pairing and had its symbol taken from stones at Jelling. For the point, name this technology
standard whose name is taken from the Viking Harald’s runes referring to the color of a dental feature.
ANSWER: Bluetooth


(Tossup 11) A separatory funnel is used to isolate compounds from immiscible types of these substances in
liquid-liquid extraction. Since they don’t form hydrogen bonds, DMSO and acetone are the “polar aprotic” type
of these substances. In aqueous mixtures, water acts as one of these substances and is often called their
“universal” type. For the point, name these substances in which a solute dissolves to form a solution.
ANSWER: solvents (prompt on liquids before liquid is read)




                                                    Page 2
                                                             Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021 Finals


(Tossup 12) The Fv region of this class of proteins contains the paratope section and loops that make up the
complementary determining region. One of these compounds called adalimumab [addAh liMoo mab] is used
to treat rheumatoid arthritis; that “monoclonal” type only binds to one epitope. The heavy and light chains of
these proteins are arranged into a Y shape. For the point, name these immune system proteins that bind to
antigens.
ANSWER: antibody (or antibodies)


(Tossup 13) This effect causes a namesake broadening of spectral lines. The Ives-Stillwell experiment
tested time dilation predicted by special relativity by measuring this effect on light. The speeds of the
source and receiver are used to determine the observed frequency from this effect. For the point, name this
effect which causes the pitch of fire truck sirens to descend as they drive away. ANSWER: Doppler effect
(Tossup 14) Users of these systems search for “nonces” in a proof-of-work protocol to earn value in a process
called “mining.” One of these systems called Ethereum uses a decentralized virtual machine and the ticker
symbol ETH. The first of these systems was invented under the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto, and uses a
public “blockchain” ledger to track transactions between virtual wallets. Bitcoin is a type of, for the point, what
digital “money” systems?
ANSWER: cryptocurrency (or cryptocurrencies; accept “Bitcoin” before Ethereum is mentioned; prompt on
“currency” or “money”)


(Tossup 15) An abnormally high concentration of iridium suggests a possible interpretation of this event
according to the Alvarez hypothesis, which is based on evidence at Mexico’s Chicxulub [CHIK soo LOOB]
crater. The Paleogene began after this event. The population of ferns spiked after this event, which may have
been caused by a giant asteroid. This event marked the end of the Mesozoic era, which was about 65 million
years ago. For the point, name this event that wiped out a group of large reptiles.
ANSWER: extinction of the dinosaurs (accept Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) or Cretaceous Tertiary (K-T)
extinction)


(Tossup 16) Organisms in this class are dying off from infection by chytrid fungus. Caecilians in this class
have two tentacles on their heads and resemble snakes, while the other orders of this class are Urodela and
Anura. Members of this class may lose their gills after undergoing metamorphosis and may start life as a
tadpole. For the point, name this class of larva staged water breathers that transition to land which includes
salamanders and frogs.
ANSWER: Amphibia (or amphibians)


(Tossup 17) Miller indices are used in the study of these substances, which were studied by Auguste Bravais.
Triclinic, orthorhombic, and tetragonal are classifications of these substances, which can be primitive or face-
centered. These materials are contrasted with amorphous materials because they have long-range order. For
the point, name these solid materials that have repeated units in a lattice structure, such as diamond.
ANSWER: crystal (accept crystal system or unit cell before mention)


                                                      Page 3
                                                                Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021 Finals


(Tossup 18) The Allred-Rochow form of this quantity is related to the effective nuclear charge. This
dimensionless quantity – symbolized chi [kai] – generally ranges from about 0.7 to 4. One type of this quantity
named for Mulliken is calculated as the mean average of electron affinity and first ionization energy. On
Pauling’s scale for this quantity, fluorine is assigned the highest value. For the point, name this quantity which
measures the ability of an atom to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity


(Tossup 19) For this technique, ThermoFisher offers instruments that are customized for its HPLC and
hydrophilic interaction variants. The gas form of this technique has higher retention times when the
liquid and analyte have similar polarities. In the setup to one form of this technique, the bottom of the stationary
phase is placed in water for a period of time. Colors of ink can be separated using, for the point, what technique
used for separating mixtures?
ANSWER: chromatography (accept more specific answers like high performance liquid chromatography; gas
chromatography; thin-film chromatography; column chromatography; or paper chromatography)


(Tossup 20) Elements in this group react with magnesium to form Grignard reagents. This group contains the
rarest naturally-occurring element in Earth’s crust, astatine. This is the only group with elements in solid, liquid,
and gas phases at STP. Table salt contains an alkali metal and an element from this group. For the point,
name this group with seven valence electrons that includes fluorine and chlorine.
ANSWER: halogens


(Tossup 21) Lofti Zadeh introduced the “fuzzy” form of this discipline where variables can take on “degrees of
truth.” The Boolean form of this discipline uses 0s and 1s alongside operations like AND, OR, and XOR [“X”
or]. This five-letter science was grounded by Aristotle in syllogisms such as “All men are mortal. Socrates is a
man. Therefore, Socrates is mortal.” For the point, name this five-letter science of reasoning and deduction.
ANSWER: logic (accept Boolean logic; accept fuzzy logic; accept fuzzy set theory; prompt on “set theory”)


(Tossup 22) A SELF-1 gene was recently discovered in a model organism that falls under this broader animal
classification. Fire and Mello worked on RNA interference in a model organism under this classification. C.
Elegans falls under nematodes which are a part of this broader classification that is divided into segmented
and unsegmented variants. Parasitic “round” ones and “tape” ones fall under, for the point, what classification
that includes “earth” [this classification] which eat soil?
ANSWER: worms (accept Nematodes or Nematoda)




                                             Page 4
   Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021 Finals


   (Tossup 23) When these formations are beneath glaciers, they can cause floods called j¨okulhlaups
   [YOur “cool” laops]. Tephra such as lapilli and bombs are produced by these formations. Pahoehoe
   [pa ho AY ho AY] and ‘a’a [AH AH] can be released from these entities. Olympus Mons is an
   example of these features on Mars, while Earthly “shield” ones include Mauna Loa. Cinder cones
   and composite cones are types of, for the point, what formations from which lava can erupt?
   ANSWER: volcanoes (prompt on mountains)


   (Tossup 24) This is the one-letter abbreviation of the amino acid glutamine. The end of a polypeptide
   opposite the carboxy-terminus is denoted by this letter. Diploid and haploid sets of chromosomes are
   most commonly written as multiples of this letter. An element symbolized by this letter undergoes
   “fixation” by rhizobia and is found in amine groups. For the point, name this letter, the chemical
   symbol for nitrogen. ANSWER: N


   (Tossup 25) OPSI is a fatal complication caused by the removal of this organ. The enlargement of
   this organ is a common symptom of mononucleosis. It’s not the kidney, but corpuscles named after
   Marcello Malpighi are found in this organ. The marginal zone separates the red and white pulp of
   this organ. Functions of this organ include storing and creating red blood cells. For the point, name
   this organ similar to a lymph node that filters and cleans blood.
   ANSWER: spleen


   (Tossup 26) This man and his student Leo Szilard invented a refrigerator with no moving parts. This
   physicist explained Brownian motion using atomic collisions and he won the Nobel Prize in Physics
   for his explanation of the photoelectric effect. This scientist formulated the theories of relativity. For
   the point, name this physicist who formulated the equation E equals m c squared.
   ANSWER: Albert Einstein
    (Tossup 27) The complex quadratic “f-of-z equals z-squared plus c” defines one of these sets. One
    of these geometric constructs named for Sierpinski is produced by removing an equilateral triangle
    from each larger iteration. These constructs were first introduced in the paper “How Long Is the
    Coast of Britain?” by Benoit Mandelbrot. For the point, name these self-similar geometric figures that
    contain an infinite number of copies of themselves.
    ANSWER: fractals (accept Mandelbrot sets until ‘Sierpinski’ is mentioned)


    (Tossup 28) These materials cause the splitting of spectral lines in an effect named for Pieter
    Zeeman. Particularly strong examples of these entities often contain rare-earth metals like
    neodymium. The strength of fields created by these objects is measured in Gauss or Teslas and
    permanent examples are named after iron. For the point, name these objects which possess north
    and south poles and which can be found in compasses or attached to refrigerators.
    ANSWER: magnets (accept ferromagnets; accept permanent magnets; accept magnetic fields)




    Page 5




                                                              Science Bee Regionals 2020 1 2020-2021 Finals


(Tossup 29) A Canon on this field of science proposes eight varieties of equipoise and divides cosmology into
earth, water, air, and fire; that text was composed by Avicenna. Imhotep was deified as a god of this field of
science. Hippocrates, often considered the founder of the modern form of this science, wrote an oath which
states to “first do no harm.” For the point, name this field of science associated with diagnosis and treatment.
ANSWER: medicine (prompt on healing)


(Tossup 30) The interior composition of these stars is explored by NASA’s NICER mission. When these
stars maintain their angular momentum, they blink beams of radiation at their poles; an effect first
noticed by Antony Hewish and Jocelyn Bell who dubbed them “little green men.” Examples of this class of
stars include pulsars and magnetars. For the point, name these dense stars made up and named for non-
positively charged nucleons.
ANSWER: neutron stars (accept pulsars before mentioned)


Extra

(Tossup 1) It’s not “guide” or “indicator,” but fossils described by this word, such as ammonites and trilobites,
had wide geographic distribution. Those fossils described by this word are used to date strata because they
were present for a short time. The ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of light in a medium is,
for the point, a value called what word of refraction?
ANSWER: index

(Tossup 2) Oceanus Procellarum of this object, part of Flamsteed P, was landed on by the Surveyor 1 probe.
Mapping of this object was done by Clementine. This object may have been formed from a collision by Theia,
an idea called the giant-impact hypothesis. One of the maria on this object is the Sea of Tranquillity. Chang’e
4 landed on the “dark side” of this object. For the point, name this celestial object that orbits the third planet
from the sun.
ANSWER: Earth’s moon (accept Luna)
Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                                Round 3



                                              Round 3
Regulation

(Tossup 1) For a spring this quantity is given by one half the spring constant times displacement squared.
This quantity for an object can be calculated as the momentum of the object squared over twice its mass,
but is more regularly calculated using one-half mass times the velocity of the object squared. The total
energy is equal to potential energy plus this form of energy. For the point, name this energy of motion.
ANSWER: kinetic energy (accept kinetic after “energy”; prompt on “energy”)

(Tossup 2) This process is indirectly measured for photons by calculating attenuation and assuming
processes like reflection, emission and scattering do not occur when using Beer’s Law. An atom can
perform this process with a photon by raising an electron’s energy level. For the point, name this
chemically defined ability to suck up another substance such as sponges taking up water, which should
not be confused with ad soprtion.
ANSWER: absorption (or absorbance; accept absorbtivity)


(Tossup 3) These cells can give rise to transient amplifying cells. Less potent varieties of this class of cells
includes those identified as hematopoietic and pluripotent. This biological cell type is sometimes confused
for more specific progenitor cells. For the point, name these cells capable of differentiating into other cells
and dividing seemingly without limit, whose embryonic variety have come under ethical scrutiny.
ANSWER: stem cells (accept totipotent stem cells)


(Tossup 4) The constant named for this state is calculated with the law of mass action and is denoted
with a capital K. Le Chatelier’s principle describes how this state can shift due to addition of product or
reactant. This state describes a reaction whose forward and reverse rates are equal. For the point, name
this general term describing a system that is balanced.
ANSWER: chemical equilibrium


(Tossup 5) 496 and 8,128 are two examples of these numbers, of which there are 51 total known examples
corresponding to the 51 known Mersenne prime numbers. “Deficient” and “abundant” are adjectives for
numbers that are not this kind of number. Because 1, 2, 4, 7, and 14 are factors of 28 and they add to 28,
28 is this type of number. Six is the smallest example of, for the point, what type of number equal to the
sum of its proper divisors?
ANSWER: perfect number(s)


(Tossup 6) One of the oldest examples of these structures is the Arkadiko one in Mycenae. C.T. Loscher
designed one of the first Cable-stayed variants of these structures while their arch and beam varieties
have been around since B.C.E.. Akashi Kaikyo is the longest of these structures that utilize a suspension
design. For the point, name these structures that connect two points to span obstacles like rivers, valleys,
and roads.
ANSWER: bridges


                                                    Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Round 3


(Tossup 7) Examples of these objects include Juan de Fuca and Nazca. Vine, Matthews, and Morley
predicted these objects contributed to seafloor spreading. Transform, divergent, and convergent are three
types of boundaries between these objects which can form mountains and cause earthquakes. Continental
drift is caused by, for the point, what large sections of the Earth’s crust?
ANSWER: tectonic plates (or plate tectonics; prompt on “tectonic”s)


(Tossup 8) The Crannell Creek Giant was considered the largest example of this classification which are
named for General Sherman and can be found in Tulare County, California. A classic gymnosperm example
that falls under this broad classification is the conifer. For the point, name this broad classification of
plants that are being threatened by deforestation.
ANSWER: tree(s) (accept Sequoia)


(Tossup 9) Maxwell’s demon is a thought experiment where this value decreases. This quantity is equal
to Boltzmann’s constant times the natural logarithm of the number of microstates for a system. The third
law of thermodynamics states that this value is zero for a perfect crystal at absolute zero, while the second
law states that this value for a closed system must always increase. For the point, name this measure of
disorder for a system.
ANSWER: entropy (prompt on S)


(Tossup 10) Excess synovial fluid in this structure is colloquially termed “water on” this joint. The
medical collateral and anterior cruciate ligaments of this joint are difficult to heal if torn. This largest
joint in the human body has its surface protected by the patella. This joint connects the tibia and fibula
to the femur bone. For the point, name this joint that bends the leg.
ANSWER: knee


(Tossup 11) COBE and WMAP are two satellite examples of this device which use microwaves. A
Cassegrain reflector and Schmidt corrector plate make a powerful type of this device. March 30th, 2021
is the launch date for one of these devices named for James Webb which is designed to replace the one
named for Edwin Hubble. For the point, name this type of device used to observe the stars.
ANSWER: space telescopes


(Tossup 12) One form of this interaction can be detected using the bromine test. This interaction contains
one sigma and one pi bond. Alkenes are characterized by having this type of interaction, while saturated
compounds do not have this interaction. The carbon atom in carbon dioxide has two bonds of this type
with both oxygen atoms. For the point, name this covalent bond in which four electrons are shared,
contrasted with single and triple.
ANSWER: double bond




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                           Round 3


(Tossup 13) The scientific name for this classification of birds is Trochilidae [TRO-kill-uh-DAY-ee]. The
smallest bird species falls under this classification of birds of American-origin, who are the only birds
capable of hovering and flying backwards. For the point, name these birds who use their beaks to drink
nectar of flowers and whose fast flapping of 79 kilometers per hours lends them their name.
ANSWER: hummingbirds


(Tossup 14) One possible alternative to a widely held hypothesis of this event is supported by giant
lava flows from the Deccan Traps. The iridium metal coating at the K-Pg layer gives evidence to the
Alvarez hypothesis of how this event occurred, which is further supported by the giant Chicxulub
[CHICK-shuh-LOOB] crater. For the point, name this event that happened around 66 million years ago
that wiped out a class of giant reptiles.
ANSWER: extinction of the dinosaurs (accept K-T extinction (or Cretaceous-Tertiary) event;
accept Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event; accept K-Pg extinction until mentioned; prompt on
“K-Pg extinction event” after mentioned; prompt on “extinction” with “The extinction of what?”)


(Tossup 15) This scientist discovered racemization [RAY-suh-muh-ZAY-shun] in tartaric acid experiments.
This scientist developed the use of a swan bottle neck to disprove the spontaneous generation of germs in
fermentation processes. This creator of the rabies and anthrax vaccine invented a process where mild heat
is used to remove pathogens. For the point, name this scientist who names a process used to keep milk
sanitary.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur


(Tossup 16) This is the largest element that forms a natural dimer. Potassium and this other element
are found in the common disinfectant, Lugol’s solution. Ions of this element react with H+ and hydrogen
peroxide in a namesake clock reaction. Deficiencies of this element cause an enlargement of the thyroid
gland known as a goiter. For the point, name this element with atomic number fifty-three and chemical
symbol I.
ANSWER: iodine (prompt on I before mentioned)


(Tossup 17) This object contains a large feature called the Tharsis bulge. The first spacecrafts to land
on this object were Viking 1 and Viking 2. The tallest mountain in the Solar System, Olympus Mons,
is located on this planet. This planet, explored by Curiosity, is circled by the two moons Phobos and
Deimos. For the point, name this iron red planet, the fourth furthest from the sun.
ANSWER: Mars


(Tossup 18) Inversions in projective geometry map a generalized type of these objects to another general
type. The equation [read slowly] “r equals cosine theta” describes this shape in polar coordinates while
their general equation in Cartesian coordinates is [read slowly] x minus h squared plus y minus k squared
equals r squared. For the point, name this two-dimensional shape consisting of the points equidistant from
a given point.
ANSWER: circle



                                                 Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                              Round 3


(Tossup 19) Martin Beijerinck [BAI-ur-INK] gave the name to these entities calling them a “contagious
living fluid.” A disease originating from Wuhan started spreading in 2020 due to the “corona” type of this
class of pathogens. Ones that take their RNA genome and transcribe it into DNA for insertion into a host
are part of the “retro-” class of these pathogens. For the point, name these debatably unalive pathogens
which include influenza and HIV.
ANSWER: viruses


(Tossup 20) This adjective describes a rule about the transition states of a quantum system to a
continuum named for Fermi. The Fibonacci numbers approach a ratio described by this adjective that can
be expressed as the quantity one plus the square root of five all over 2. For the point, name this six letter
adjective that describes objects that have been plated with an element with chemical symbol Au.
ANSWER: golden


(Tossup 21) The ratio of this quantity to charge is used in a namesake form of spectrometry [SPECK -
trom -uh - tree]. The non-zero values of this quantity for the W and Z bosons is due to symmetry breaking
in the Higgs field. Particles that are thought to have a value of zero for this quantity include gluons and
photons. Einstein related energy to this quantity times the speed of light squared. For the point, name
this quantity measured in kilograms.
ANSWER: mass (prompt on kilogram until mentioned by asking “What quantity is measured in
kilograms?”; prompt on m)


(Tossup 22) This symbol is used to make comments in Matlab. This symbol represents modular arithmetic
in languages like python. The difference between measured value and the expected value over the expected
value times one hundred yields an error named for this symbol and can also be used in chemistry to
determine yield with 100 being perfect yield. For the point, name this symbol, a diagonal line with two
circles on either side.
ANSWER: percent sign (or symbol)


(Tossup 23) Ronald Ross’s work identified the vector for this disease which Nobel laureate Tu Youyou
discovered can be treated with artemisinin. This disease is caused by members of the plasmodium
family. Those heterozygous for sickle cell anemia are resistance to this disease. For the point, name this
mosquito-borne disease whose name comes from Italian for “bad air.”
ANSWER: malaria


(Tossup 24) In the Vickers Hardness test, this mineral is used to make indents. A gum-like material used
to coat this mineral is called nyf to give this mineral ridge-like appearance. On the Mohs hardness scale,
this mineral is just above corundum. Graphite can be converted to this mineral under high pressure. For
the point, name this hardest mineral on the Mohs scale, a valuable carbon-based gemstone.
ANSWER: diamonds




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                          Round 3


(Tossup 25) Two substances ability to form one of these systems is characterized by their miscibility
[MISS-”uh-bility”]. Unlike colloids, these systems are formed from two substances in the same phase.
Examples of these systems that involve water are referred to as “aqueous.” For the point, name these
homogeneous mixtures of a solute dissolved in a solvent.
ANSWER: solutions


(Tossup 26) Denial of this condition, despite evidence for it, is termed Anton-Babinski Syndrome. This
condition partially names a disorder experienced by those who fail Ishihara’s test. This condition can be
onset by age-related macular degeneration. Damage to the optic chiasm can cause this condition. For the
point, name this condition of near or complete vision loss.
ANSWER: blindness (accept color blindness; prompt on “vision impairment” or related answers of
“lack” of “eyesight”)


(Tossup 27) Norman Borlaug helped developed security in this good for several nations with his
developments in agronomy. The Green Revolution helped increase the global production of this general
good. Thomas Malthus thought population would exceed the production of this good, leading to a
population trap. For the point, name this good that can be characterized by macro- and micronutrients
and are necessary for preventing hunger.
ANSWER: food (accept wheats until “protein”; prompt on “plants”)


(Tossup 28) This phenomenon in rotating fluids is the planetary or Rossby type. Solitons are a
mathematically modelled type of this phenomenon that maintain their shape as they propagate. The
longitudinal variety of this phenomenon can propagate through a spring. For the point, name these
phenomenon whose ocean variety can propagate themselves to beaches.
ANSWER: waves [accet solitary waves)


(Tossup 29) The most common source of this element is cassiterite, which contains its oxide. The alloy
pewter is around 90% this element and 5 to 10% antimony. Lead and this element make up the fusible
metal alloy solder. Aluminum cans are often erroneously referred to as containing this element. For the
point, name this element with atomic number fifty and chemical symbol Sn.
ANSWER: tin (prompt on Sn before mentioned)


(Tossup 30) The principal tree used to extract this material is the South American Hevea brasiliensis
[huh-VEE-uh bra-ZILL-ee-EN-siss] species. Vulcanization is a technique to strengthen the cross links
between this material. This material is extracted in the form of latex by “tapping” its namesake trees.
For the point, name this sticky elastic material extracted from a namesake tree and used to produces like
erasers.
ANSWER: natural rubber (or India rubber; Amazonian rubber caucho or cautchouc; prompt on
“latex” until mentioned)




                                                 Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 2020 2 2019-2020                                                            Round 3


Extra

(Tossup 31) Nuclear pasta refers to a type of degenerate matter thought to be found within the crust of
these stars. These stars sit above the Chandrasekhar limit and below the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff
limit, making them larger than white dwarfs. For the point, name this super dense type of star named for
the neutral charged atomic nuclei component that make them up.
ANSWER: neutron stars

(Tossup 32) For pioneering cryogenic techniques with this device, three scientist won the 2017 Nobel
Prize in Chemistry. This device can use scanning and transmission techniques when taking advantage
of the wave nature of an electron. Robert Hooke and Antonie van Leeuwenhoek were pioneers of using
glass lenses to create magnification in this device. For the point, name this scientific instrument used to
magnify tiny specimen.
ANSWER: microscope(s) (accept electron microscope(s))




                                                  Page 6
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                 Round 2



                                            Round 2
Regulation

(Tossup 1) This molecule’s metabolism was the focus of Jacques Monod and Francois Jacob’s study of
its namesake operon. This sugar molecule has a beta 1,4 glycosidic bond between glucose and a similarly
named sugar, which is broken down by a namesake enzyme maintained by many people of Scandinavian
descent. For the point, name this sugar molecule, found in milk, that a majority of people are “intolerant”
to.
ANSWER: lactose (do not accept or prompt on “galactose”)

(Tossup 2) Neutral theory symbolizes the rate of these events with the Greek letter mu [mew]. The
terms “frameshift” and “point” are two variants of these events. These events are deleterious if the result
decreases an organism’s fitness. These events introduce new alleles to a population. They can happen to
DNA exposed to UV light or nuclear radiation. For the point, name these events that cause alteration in
an organism’s DNA.
ANSWER: mutations (accept mutation rate; accept point mutation; accept frameshift mutation;
accept mutagenesis)


(Tossup 3) Isaac Newton’s calculation for this phenomenon’s speed was too low due to treating its
travel as an isothermal process instead of an adiabatic process. Interference between two waves of this
phenomenon is responsible for beats. This phenomenon travels at 343 meters per second and cannot be
perceived above 20 kilohertz. For the point, name this phenomenon measured in decibels and created by
thunder.
ANSWER: sound waves (accept speed of sound)


(Tossup 4) While studying these events, H.F. Reid of Johns Hopkins coined the term “elastic rebound” to
describe the weaker events that follow. The S and P waves from these events propagate from a hypocenter.
The magnitude of these events is measured on the Richter scale. For the point, name these seismic events
which occur when tectonic plates rapidly slip past each other along faults, which causes the ground to
shake.
ANSWER: earthquakes


(Tossup 5) The kinetic isotope effect is studied by replacing this element with deuterium. The donation
of the charged form of this element characterize Bronsted-Lowry acids. The proton-proton chain converts
this element to helium. The gas form of this element is used in zeppelins. For the point, name this most
abundant and lightest element in the universe.
ANSWER: hydrogen (prompt on proton after “Bronsted Lowry”; prompt on H, H+, or H2)




                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                     Round 2


(Tossup 6) Part of this organ is underdeveloped in microtia. In another part of this organ, the organ of
Corti sits on top of the basilar membrane, picking up stimulus from hair cells. This organ’s outer portion
is the pinna, while across the typanum, it has three of the smallest bones in the human body: the males,
the incus and the stapes. For the point, name this organ that controls hearing.
ANSWER: ears (accept inner/middle/outer ear; accept pinna before mentioned; prompt on “cochlea”)


(Tossup 7) The heavy form of this compound is used in nuclear power plant cooling towers. This
compound’s density is maximized at 4 degrees celsius. This compound is known as the universal solvent
due to its high polarity. Aqueous solutions are made using this solvent. Along with acetone, the distilled
form of this compound is used to clean glassware in labs. For the point, name this compound composed
of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
ANSWER: water (accept H2O)


(Tossup 8) First order systems in this mathematical discipline are also known as “predicate” [this word].
Boolean algebra is used to represent truth values in this discipline’s propositional form. It’s not philosophy,
but Aristotle established syllogisms as an early way to derive conclusions from a valid inference in this
discipline. For the point, name this 5-letter word for the study of reasoning which gets its name from the
Greek word logos.
ANSWER: logic (accept propositional logic; accept formal logic; accept propositional calculus; accept
zeroth-order logic; prompt on Boolean algebra before mentioned)


(Tossup 9) A cart and pole serves as an “inverted” one of these devices in control theory. Foucault
[foo-KOH] used one of these devices to demonstrate the rotation of the Earth. The balls in Newton’s
cradle are the bobs of these devices. Christopher Huygens [HOY-guns] was one of the first to use this
device as a clock. For the point, name this device consisting of a weight suspended from a pivot which
swings back and forth.
ANSWER: pendulums


(Tossup 10) Frontal wedging describes how a less dense, warmer pocket of this substance is forced over
a more dense, cooler pocket. Thermals are rising parcels of this substance. This substance is forced from
low to high altitude in orographic lifting. This substance is approximately made up of 21% oxygen, and
1% argon. For the point, name this substance whose bulk movement causes winds.
ANSWER: air mass (prompt on “wind” before mentioned; prompt on “gas”es)


(Tossup 11) This quantity is minimized at a mixture’s eutectic point. Ethylene glycol lowers this quantity
by disrupting hydrogen bonds. Applying salt to roads during winter is one way to lower this quantity for
ice. When water reaches this point, it exists in equilibrium as a solid and liquid. This quantity is equal to
0 degrees Celsius for water. For the point, name this temperature where a phase transition from solid to
liquid occurs.
ANSWER: melting point (accept freezing point; accept crystallization point; accept “temperature”
in place of “point”; prompt on “0 degrees Celsius”, “273(.15) Kelvin” or “32 degrees Fahrenheit”)



                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                  Round 2


(Tossup 12) One of these statements refers to “the set of all sets that do not contain themselves” and
was formulated by Bertrand Russell. Enrico Fermi names one of these statements regarding the lack of
contact with extraterrestrial life. The Liar’s one proposes that “This statement is false.” For the point,
name this seven-letter word for confusing statements that often contain self-contradictions.
ANSWER: paradoxes (prompt on contradiction before mentioned)


(Tossup 13) A disulfide compound containing this element is known as pyrite or “fool’s gold.” Porphyrins
[POR-fur-ins] that contain this element are sometimes called hemes [heems]. This element names the type
of permanent magnetism in the standard bar magnet. This element and carbon alloy to form steel. For
the point, name this metal that lends its name to ferromagnetism and has atomic symbol Fe.
ANSWER: iron (prompt on Fe)


(Tossup 14) Holes in this structure are referred to as fenestrae in anatomy. Trepanning is a method of
relieving internal pressure by putting a “burr hole” into this structure. The bones of this structure are
joined together by fibrous sutures. This structure includes the frontal bones, occipital bones, and temporal
bones. For the point, name this bone structure made up of eight cranial bones and fourteen facial bones.
ANSWER: skull (accept skulls; accept cranium until “cranial” prompt afterwards)


(Tossup 15) The mass, charge, and angular momentum of these objects completely describes them,
according to the no-hair theorem. One of these objects in M87 was the first to be pictured in 2019. These
objects can be thought of as singularities in space-time. Hawking radiation occurs at these object’s event
horizons. For the point, name these objects which not even light can escape.
ANSWER: black holes


(Tossup 16) This phenomena is related to a field denoted with an uppercase B. The change in the
magnitude of this phenomenon can be used to create potential by Faraday’s law. Ampere’s Law describes
how current can produce a non-zero value for this phenomenon. This phenomena is typically measured in
Teslas. For the point, name this phenomena present in objects with a north and south pole.
ANSWER: magnetism (accept magnetic field; accept magnetic force; accept magnets; bar magnets;
accept geomagnetic field; prompt on “B-field”)


(Tossup 17) This planet’s two wide gossamer rings are mainly composed of debris from Amalthea
and Thebe. Some scientists have proposed this planet acts like an “asteroid sponge” after observations
of Shoemaker-Levy 9’s collision with this planet. Galileo names the four largest moons of this planet,
including Ganymede and Io. For the point, name this gas giant with a Great Red Spot, the fifth planet
from the Sun.
ANSWER: Jupiter




                                                  Page 3
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                     Round 2


(Tossup 18) Euler proved that the reciprocals of an infinite amount of these numbers sum to pi squared
over six. Numbers with this property are the only positive integers with an odd number of unique factors.
Two triangular numbers sum to a number with this property. The first few examples of these numbers are
one, four, nine, and sixteen. For the point, name these numbers that are equal to an integer multiplied by
itself.
ANSWER: perfect squares (or square numbers; or squared integers; do not accept or prompt on just
“integers”)


(Tossup 19) Theridiidae [thay-ree-dee-uh-DAY] create the tangle variant of this structure. Other variants
of this structure include the funnel and tubular variants, and the substance used to make this structure has
the same tensile strength as steel. The large spiral variants of this structure is associated with orb-weavers.
This structure is not used by tarantulas to capture prey. For the point, name this structure created with
sticky silk, used by spiders to capture unlucky insects.
ANSWER: spider webs (or cobweb)


(Tossup 20) This element is found with sulfur in cinnabar. Alloys containing this element are referred to
as amalgams. Bromine and this element are the only liquids at room temperature. This element was used
in the first thermometers and its use in hat factories led to poisoning from it being called “mad hatter
disease.” For the point, name this element with atomic number 80 and symbol Hg.
ANSWER: mercury (prompt on Hg before mention)


(Tossup 21) This man’s military innovations include designs of a heat ray for concentrating the sun’s
energy. This man created a screw used for moving water up a hill. According to legend, this man discovered
a method for weighing a gold crown after which he jumped out of his bathtub shouting “Eureka!” while
running naked through the streets. For the point, name this Greek mathematician of Syracuse who
discovered the principle of buoyancy.
ANSWER: Archimedes of Syracuse


(Tossup 22) Pairs of these particles are opposed to these particles similarly named holes. These leptons
are less massive than muons and tauons.The positron is the antiparticle of these particles. These particles
actually make up a probability distribution and do not cleanly orbit around the atomic nucleus. For the
point, name these elementary particles that carry negative charge.
ANSWER: electrons (prompt on e)


(Tossup 23) The cycle of growth of this structure is separated into anagen, telogen and catagen phases.
This biological structure is rich in alpha-keratin, whose disulfide bonds explain why it smells bad when
burned. This protein structure separates into the bulb and follicle. Sebum supplies oil to this structure
that can be stripped with shampoos. For the point, name this feature of mammals that grows on the skin
and scalp of humans.
ANSWER: hair follicle (accept hairs; prompt on follicles)




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                                 Round 2


(Tossup 24) The theoretical maximum efficiency of an object using this type of energy is given by the
Shockley-Queisser [KAY-ser] limit. Semiconductors can be used to create a p-n junction that harnesses
the power of this type of energy from the photovoltaic effect. This non-biological source of energy has a
lower percentage of consumption than wind or hydropower. For the point, name this form of energy from
the sun.
ANSWER: solar energy (accept energy from a solar cell/panel; prompt on light or photons or sun energy
and other equivalents)


(Tossup 25) Wladimir [“Vladimir”] Köppen [KUR-pen] developed a classification scheme for these
systems that splits them into five groups. Rising CO2 levels have caused a greenhouse effect which cause
a namesake change in these systems, a phenomenon synonymous with “global warming.” For the point,
name this seven-letter word that defines the general weather patterns of a particular region.
ANSWER: climate


(Tossup 26) Modern variants of these devices made in the U.S. followed the Teller-Ulam design. These
devices work either by chaining collisions of sub-critical material in the “gun method” or using chemically
doped explosive lenses. These devices use fissile material such as enriched uranium or plutonium. For the
point, name these weapons of mass destruction that can create giant mushroom clouds and radioactive
contamination.
ANSWER: nuclear weapons (accept nuke accept nuclear bomb; accept nuclear warhead; accept
atomic bombs; or atom bombs; or a-bombs; accept thermonuclear weapons; accept hydrogen
bombs; or H-bombs)


(Tossup 27) This radiation range is governed by Bragg’s law in its namesake crystallography.
Chandrasekhar [chahn drah say kar] names a telescope that uses this radiation range. This radiation range
was used by Rosalind Franklin to take Photo 51, which Watson & Crick used to determine the double
helix structure. Wilhelm [vill-HELM] Röntgen [ROOnt gen] discovered this radiation between UV and
gamma rays. For the point, name this radiation range that is most commonly known for being used to
image bones.
ANSWER: x-rays or x-(ray) radiation (prompt on Röntgen radiation) [Science Bee Regionals 1]


(Tossup 28) Only 10% of nutrients are retained in this biome’s soil, leading farmers to use slash-and-burn
techniques. The upper canopy in this biome is home to birds of paradise and toucans. On the floor of this
biome, you can find red-eyed tree frogs. This biome is home to the most biodiversity. The Amazon is an
example of, for the point, what biome, characterized by tall trees and high precipitation?
ANSWER: rainforest [prompt on “forest”]




                                                  Page 5
Science Bee Regionals 1 2019-2020                                                               Round 2


(Tossup 29) Raising i to the fourth power gives this number. This is the only natural number with exactly
one divisor. X raised to negative this number gives x’s reciprocal. Raising a number to this power gives
back the same number. Raising a number to zero yields this number. The multiplicative identity states
that a real number times this number equals that number. For the point, name this smallest positive
integer.
ANSWER: one


(Tossup 30) It’s not basalt, but this felsic rock names a composition of igneous rocks that have a lower
melting point than rocks with andesitic composition. This intrusive rock is coarse-grained, unlike its
extrusive equivalent rhyolite. This rock is the major component in the domes it names at Yosemite
National Park. For the point, name this rock whose name comes from its grain-like texture.
ANSWER: granite


Extra

(Tossup 31) The premise of these things as a fundamental unit was first proposed by Matthias Schleiden
[muh-TIE-us shly-dun] and Theodor Schwann. The theory of miasma prevailed until the discovery of
this fundamental unit. Spontaneous generation proposed these fundamental units could form from dead
matter. Robert Hooke observed these units in cork and named these things after the rooms monks live in.
For the point, name these fundamental building blocks of life.
ANSWER: cells (prompt on germs or microbes until “cork” with “what fundamental unit makes up
germs?”)




                                                 Page 6
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                             Science Bee 2 - Round 1



Science Bee 2 - Round 1
Round 1 Tossups
(1)     The Wittig [[VIT-izh]] reaction forms a bond between two atoms of this element.
One allotrope of this element found in meteorites has a hexagonal structure and is named
for Kathleen Lonsdale. Buckyballs and nanotubes are fullerenes formed from this element.
Scotch tape is used to isolate a form of this element called graphene. For the point, name
this element which is the basis of organic chemistry, symbolized "C."

ANSWER: Carbon (accept C before mentioned)

(2)     The name of this group is taken from the tendency of its members to form salts
when reacting with metals. The elements in this group are so highly reactive that they are
not found free in nature but instead in compounds or in a diatomic state. The reactivity of
this group is due to its seven valence electrons. For the point, what is this seventeenth
group of the periodic table which includes chlorine, fluorine, bromine, and iodine?

ANSWER: Halogens (accept Group 17 before mentioned; accept Group 7A)

(3)    The Higgs mechanism explains why certain particles possess this quantity, which is
mediated by the Higgs boson. Force is equal to this quantity times acceleration, while
momentum is equal to this quantity times velocity. Unlike weight, this quantity is unaffected
by gravitational force. According to Albert Einstein, energy is equal to this quantity times
the speed of light squared. For the point, name this quantity, whose SI unit is the kilogram.

ANSWER: Mass (prompt on "M"; prompt on "weight" before "acceleration")

(4)     Hagfish release a highly fibrous variety of this substance to help escape from
predators. This substance can be expelled from the body with the help of drugs like
Guaifenesin [[gwy-FEN-eh-sin]] and other expectorants. People suffering from cystic
fibrosis experience a buildup of this substance in the lungs and digestive tract. For the point,
name this biological substance which is emitted from namesake membranes in the nose by
people with allergies.

ANSWER: Mucus (accept Phlegm, Snot, etc. before "namesake")

(5)    Substances in this phase are described using an equation with "a" and "b" correction
terms called the van der Waals equation. Chromatography of substances in this phase is
often paired with mass spectrometry. Methane and ethane are in this phase at standard
temperature and pressure. The “ideal” type of substances in this phase are described by the
equation "PV equals nRT." For the point, name this phase contrasted with liquid and solid.

ANSWER: Gasses
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                           Science Bee 2 - Round 1


(6)     An uncertainty relation exists between this quantity and time. One form of this
quantity can be determined with the calculation “one half times mass times velocity
squared” and another form of the same quantity can be determined with the calculation
“mass times gravity times height.” The first law of thermodynamics states that this property
cannot be created or destroyed. For the point, name this “potential” or “kinetic” quantity
which is measured in Joules.

ANSWER: Energy (accept Kinetic energy; accept Potential energy)

(7)     Friedrich Miescher [[MEE-shuh]] first isolated this material while its components
were studied by Albrecht Kossel. Frederick Griffith's experiments suggested this molecule
carries genetic information. Photo 51 of this material shows its structure and was taken by
Rosalind Franklin. Composed of the nucleotides cytosine, guanine, adenine, and thymine, for
the point, what is this biological molecule with a double-helix structure discovered by
Watson and Crick?

ANSWER: DNA (or Deoxyribonucleic acid)

(8)     Description acceptable. Because of this potential outcome, the Union of Concerned
Scientists officially opposed solar geo-engineering in 2020. This event will mark the end of
the Anthropocene epoch, and Stephen Hawking thought it the most likely outcome of an AI
takeover. Scenarios for this event include a three degree climate shift, a nuclear winter, and
a large asteroid impact. For the point, name this final catastrophe that some scientists now
believe will start with a global pandemic.

ANSWER: The End of the World (accept descriptions like the Apocalypse, the Collapse of
civilization, the Extinction of humanity, etc.)

(9)     An acne treatment sold under the brand name Accutane is a derivative of this
vitamin. The "golden" variety of rice was genetically engineered to treat deficiencies of this
vitamin. Chemical sources of this vitamin include retinol and retinal. This vitamin's
precursor is beta-carotene. For the point, name this vitamin found in sweet potatoes and
carrots, which supports vision health.

ANSWER: Vitamin A (accept Retinol or Retinal before mentioned)

(10) The total sum of this quantity around a closed loop is zero according to Kirchhoff’s
[[KEER-koffs]] second law. For a point charge, this quantity is calculated using the formula
"k times q divided by r." Power is equal to this quantity times current, and this quantity is
equal to current times resistance according to Ohm’s law. For the point, name this quantity,
symbolized V, which is 120 for U.S. wall outlets and measures the electric potential
difference.

ANSWER: Voltage (accept Volts; accept Potential before mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                          Science Bee 2 - Round 1


(11) A circle that goes through points derived from these objects is called the “nine point
circle.” A statement named for these objects can be proved using the Cauchy [[KOH-shee]]-
Schwarz inequality. "S squared root three over four" is the area of one type of these shapes.
Binomial coefficients are found in an arrangement of these shapes named for Pascal. For the
point, name these shapes whose isosceles type has two sides of the same length.

ANSWER: Triangles (accept Pascal's triangle; accept Equilateral triangle; accept Triangle
inequality)

(12) Convection in this region was thought to be active in the Hadean [[HAY-dee-un]]
period. The D double prime layer is the lowermost part of this region, and S waves are
absorbed after going through this region. The Mohorovicic [[moh-hoh-roh-VEE-cheek]]
discontinuity lies just above this region. The asthenosphere lies within this region, and the
lithosphere includes the crust and the upper part of this region. For the point, name this
layer of Earth above the outer core.

ANSWER: Mantle

(13) Magellanic clouds at the south pole of this entity produce the Magellanic Stream.
The 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded for the discovery of Sagittarius A-Star, a
"supermassive" object found at the center of this entity. This entity is part of the Virgo
supercluster of galaxies, which also includes its nearest neighbor, Andromeda. For the point,
name this galaxy which contains our solar system.

ANSWER: Milky Way galaxy

(14) The smallest species of these animals ejects the nucleus from its nerve cells,
allowing them to grow to sizes smaller than .15 [[POINT-ONE-FIVE]] millimeters. In
addition to the world's smallest insect, the fairyfly, these animals include one that hunts
large spiders, the tarantula hawk. Common varieties of these Hymenopterans include
yellowjackets and hornets. For the point, name these insects which, unlike bees, do not
make honey.

ANSWER: Wasps (accept Hornet before mentioned; accept Fairy wasps; accept Spider
wasps; prompt on "Hymenoptera" before mentioned; do not accept or prompt on "Bees")

(15) Aside from the number of calories, a 2018 study found no difference in the effect of
this general category of products versus the DripDrop ORS used during cholera outbreaks.
Dr. Robert Cade invented a popular example of these products for the University of Florida's
football players, and many claim the high level of sugar in these products offsets the
electrolytes they replace. For the point, name this type of beverage, like Powerade and
Gatorade, meant to rehydrate athletes.

ANSWER: Sports drinks (accept Electrolyte drink before "electrolytes" is mentioned;
prompt on "Powerade," "Gatorade," or other similar drinks)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                            Science Bee 2 - Round 1


(16) This functional group can be protected with trimethylsilyl [[trai-meh-thil-SAI-lill]]
ethers [[EE-thers]]. In a process named for Emil Fischer, a carboxylic [[kar-box-ILL-ick]]
acid and one of these compounds react together to form an ester. Fermentation of corn can
form a compound with this functional group which is used as a biofuel. Isopropyl is also
known as the rubbing type of compounds with, for the point, what functional group with
oxygen and hydrogen which is found in ethanol?

ANSWER: Alcohols (accept Hydroxyls)

(17) Connate fluids are expelled during a process used to form these rocks called
diagenesis. These rocks can be classified as clastic or chemical, and conglomerate and
breccia [[BREH-chuh]] are both this type of rock. These rocks are formed from compaction
and cementation. For the point, name these rocks, exemplified by sandstone and limestone,
which are contrasted with igneous and metamorphic rocks.

ANSWER: Sedimentary rocks

(18) This type of material can be naturally occurring or man-made. Because this material
is a physical combination, it can retain beneficial properties of both donor materials and
take on new properties such as increased strength, durability, or resistance to corrosion.
Duralumin, electrum, solder [[SAW-der]], steel, alnico, nichrome [[NIH-krome]], pewter,
bronze, and brass are all examples of this solid solution. For the point, what is this mixture
of a metal and another substance?

ANSWER: Alloys

(19) A fractal called the "Apollonian gasket" starts from three of these objects, which
then fill in the space left. A shape that can be inscribed in one of these shapes is quantified
using Brahmagupta’s formula. In the power of a point, lines intersect or are tangent to these
shapes. The area of these shapes is "pi times its radius squared." For the point, name these
shapes which consist of points equidistant from a central point.

ANSWER: Circles

(20) These animals make up the sister taxon Deltatheroida and are the last living
metatherians. These animals include the Macropodidae, which are notably bipedal. Notable
carnivorous examples of these animals include the extinct thylacine and the Tasmanian
devil. The only example of these animals that is native to North America is the opossum. For
the point, name this group of mammals known for their pouches, which includes kangaroos
and koalas.

ANSWER: Marsupials (or Marsupialia)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                            Science Bee 2 - Round 1


(21) Description acceptable. B. subtilis is used to test the efficacy of these processes,
which include the phytosanitary irradiation of produce. Brucellosis is rare thanks to one of
these methods, pasteurization, and the use of sodium benzoate for this purpose can greatly
extend shelf-life. For the point, canning and refrigeration are modern techniques for this
process that reduces spoilage of products like milk and vegetables.

ANSWER: Food preservation (accept descriptions like "preventing food from going bad",
"preventing food poisoning", "preventing food contamination", or the preservation of
specific types of food)

(22) Chinooks are an example of the foehn [[FANE]] type of these phenomena, other
examples of which are called katabatic when they go downhill. Anemometers are used to
measure this phenomenon, and calm examples of these phenomena are found in the horse
latitudes. Gales are a strong type of these phenomena given a rating of seven to ten on the
Beaufort scale, which characterizes their speed. For the point, name these phenomena in
which air moves due to a change in atmospheric pressure.

ANSWER: Winds (accept Breezes; accept Foehn winds; accept Katabatic winds)

(23) This planet's slow perihelion precession served as an early confirmation of
Einstein's theory of general relativity. This planet was explored by the Mariner 10 and
Messenger missions. This planet experiences the widest day-to-night temperature swings of
any body in the solar system, ranging from negative 280 to positive 800 degrees fahrenheit.
For the point, name this smallest planet, which is also the closest planet to the Sun.

ANSWER: Mercury

(24) Adding gold salts and possibly tin to glass turns it this primary color in a technique
dating to the Roman Empire. Stars of this color are classified as K or M, during which the
helium flash occurs. The flame tests of strontium and lithium are this color, and litmus
paper turns this color in acidic solutions. Jupiter has a large storm called the “great [this
color] spot.” Light with wavelength longer than visible light is called, for the point, “infra”
what color?

ANSWER: Red

(25) Diagonal scratches in these structures are the primary evidence of right-hand
dominance in early human ancestors. Exposing the base of these structures causes a painful
condition called abfraction. Damage to these structures can painfully expose the nerve-rich
inner pulp, which is normally surrounded by dentin and enamel. For the point, name these
oral structures, which are used to chew food.

ANSWER: Teeth (accept Tooth)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                             Science Bee 2 - Round 1


(26) Fourteen configurations in these substances named for Bravais are described by
Miller indices. Proteins are turned into this form so they can be studied with X-ray
diffraction. These substances, contrasted with amorphous solids, are orderly and have a
lattice structure. Smectic is a phase of the “liquid” type of these substances, used in TVs. For
the point, name these substances with repeated arrangements of atoms such as diamond.

ANSWER: Crystals (accept Crystalline solid(s); accept Liquid Crystal Diode(s); prompt on
"LCD")

(27) Pouchlike protrusions are present in a type of these objects described by William
Clement Ley, the “mammatus” type. Some of these objects which resemble hoods are called
a "pileus" [[pai-LEE-us]], and contrails from airplanes are an artificial example of these
things. "Anvil” types of these objects are “cumulonimbus,” and other types of them include
cirrus and stratus. For the point, name these objects from which rain falls.

ANSWER: Clouds (accept Mammatus clouds; accept Scarf clouds; accept Cap clouds;
accept Cumulonimbus clouds; accept Cirrus clouds; accept Stratus clouds)

(28) Name spaces in this system are regulated by ICANN, and it uses dot decimal
notation. The first two nodes of this system were at SRI and UCLA, and TCP/IP was
standardized in this system for the NSF. This system's predecessor, ARPANET, was created
by the Department of Defense which made this system for time sharing. For the point, name
this global system of computer networks which allows you to access the World Wide Web.

ANSWER: Internet (prompt on "World Wide Web")

(29) These warm-blooded animals are the closest living relatives to crocodilians, and the
respiratory tract of these animals flows in a single direction. Some of these animals swallow
stones to store in the gizzard which help with breaking down food. Many of these warm-
blooded animals possess hollow bones to reduce their body weight. For the point, name
these feathered animals, most of which can fly.

ANSWER: Birds (or Aves)

(30) A CME which originated from this entity caused a powerful event which was
recorded in 1859 by British astronomer Richard Carrington. In this structure's core,
pressure is sufficient for hydrogen to fuse into helium, providing most of this structure's
energy. This structure's atmosphere or "corona" can be seen during times of an eclipse. For
the point, name this star found at the center of our solar system.

ANSWER: The Sun (or Sol)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                         Science Bee 2 - Round 1


Extra Question
(1)     Unlike most other mammals, monkeys and apes cannot synthesize this nutrient
which is the primary cofactor for the formation of collagen. Diets poor in this nutrient can
lead to bleeding gums and brown skin spots. That deficiency of this nutrient is known as
scurvy. This vitamin is commonly taken in "super doses" to prevent and fight colds. For the
point, name this vitamin which is commonly found in citrus fruits.

ANSWER: Vitamin C (or Ascorbic acid)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                              Science Bee 2 - Round 2



Science Bee 2 - Round 2
Round 2 Tossups
(1)     By stopping the release of this mineral from voltage-gated channels,
Benzothiazepines [[ben-zoh-THAI-uh-zuh-peens]] can be used to treat high blood pressure.
The release of this mineral's 2+ [[TWO-PLUS]] ion is an important trigger for muscle
contraction. The amount of this mineral in the blood is regulated by the action of
osteoclasts. Diets poor in vitamin D can prevent the absorption of this mineral, leading to
rickets. For the point, name this elemental mineral found in milk, which is used to build
teeth and bones.

ANSWER: Calcium (or Ca [[SEE-AY]])

(2)     This quantity represents the distance between the ground state and saddle point on
a potential energy surface. The related "delta G double dagger" often replaces this quantity,
which is divided by negative RT in the formula for the temperature dependence of reaction
rates. On a reaction coordinate, this quantity represents the distance between the reactants
and transition state. Catalysts speed up reactions by decreasing, for the point, what
minimum energy needed for a reaction to take place?

ANSWER: Activation energy

(3)     To create this statistical tool, order the numbers of a data set from smallest to
largest before finding the median. The next step in this tool's creation is to find the median
of each half of the data set and thus, the first and third quartiles. Finally, this tool requires
finding the minimum and maximum values of the set as well as the median and quartiles,
enclosing them in a rectangle. For the point, you have created what analytical graph which
shows the distribution of data?

ANSWER: Box and whisker plot (accept similar answers for "plot" such as "diagram" or
"graph")

(4)    This theory explains the Sagnac effect, which is used in ring laser gyroscopes. This
theory explains the aberration of light, and the derivation of this theory depends on
Minkowski spacetime or Lorentz transformations. Time dilation and length contraction are
explained by this theory, from which the mass-energy equivalence can be derived. For the
point, name this theory in physics by Albert Einstein which preceded a "General"
formulation.

ANSWER: Special Theory of Relativity (prompt on partial answers; do not accept or
prompt on "General Relativity")
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                             Science Bee 2 - Round 2


(5)     This quantity is determined for monatomic gases using the Sackur-Tetrode equation
and remains constant in reversible processes. According to the third law of
thermodynamics, this quantity for a perfect crystal is zero at absolute zero, and according to
the second law, this quantity does not decrease over time. For the point, name this quantity,
symbolized S, which quantifies the amount of disorder in a system.

ANSWER: Entropy (accept S before mentioned)

(6)     A “tension” named for this scientist is the discrepancy in measuring a value named
for him. "A dot over a," in which "a" is the scale factor, is used to calculate a constant named
for this scientist. A system devised by this scientist gives designations like SBc to galaxies
which are arranged in a “tuning fork” shape. With a namesake constant describing the
expansion of the universe, for the point, who was this scientist who names a 1990 space
telescope?

ANSWER: Edwin Hubble (accept Hubble’s tension; accept Hubble’s constant; accept
Hubble’s sequence; accept Hubble’s tuning fork)

(7)     Along with chloroplasts, the existence of these organelles is explained by
endosymbiotic theory, which holds that one single-celled organism consumed and
incorporated another. These double-membraned organelles are filled with a viscous
namesake matrix. These organelles contain a maternally inherited genome consisting of a
circular strand of DNA. For the point, name this organelle responsible for ATP synthesis,
often called the "powerhouse of the cell."

ANSWER: Mitochondria (or Mitochondrion)

(8)     John Hunter claimed neural fluid caused this disease, which was treated with
hemlock juice for Anne of Austria. William Halsted used a radical surgery to treat this
disease, and John Warren performed a mastectomy to remove this disease from Nabby
Adams. This disease has received greater attention due to the Pink Ribbon and the Komen
Race for the Cure. Mammograms can detect, for the point, what cancer which typically
develops in the milk ducts.

ANSWER: Breast cancer (prompt on "cancer")

(9)    The strength of compounds formed in this manner is equivalent to the lattice
energy. Structures form in this way as a result of differences greater than 1.7 on the Pauling
scale of electronegativity. These bonds typically form between metals and non-metal
elements, forming a chemical salt. For the point, name this type of bond formed by atoms
exchanging electrons, which can be contrasted with covalent bonds.

ANSWER: Ionic bond(s) (prompt on "Chemical bond(s)")
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                              Science Bee 2 - Round 2


(10) A pre-cancerous condition of this organ that changed stratified squamous
epithelium to simple columnar epithelium is named for Norman Barrett. The formation of a
Schatzki ring in this organ can lead to dysphagia [[dis-FAY-zhuh]]. The upper part of this
organ runs parallel to the trachea, or wind pipe, and this organ can be damaged by the
improper release of stomach acid into it, causing heartburn. For the point, name this organ
which carries food from the mouth to the stomach.

ANSWER: Esophagus

(11) Since 2010, this government agency has funded Innovation Hubs finding
alternatives to rare earth magnets. This department's Office of Science oversees the Fermi,
Brookhaven, and Oak Ridge National Laboratories. This department monitors both federal
hydroelectric projects and radioactive waste disposal. In February 2021, Jennifer Granholm
became Secretary of, for the point, what cabinet department which oversees the U.S. supply
of power?

ANSWER: United States Department of Energy (prompt on "DOE")

(12) These particles consist of one up quark and two down quarks, and stars named for
these particles are supported by their namesake degeneracy pressure. Uranium fission is
initiated by the absorption of one of these particles, and after fission, more of these particles
are released to sustain a chain reaction. For the point, name these uncharged subatomic
particles which make up the atomic nucleus with protons.

ANSWER: Neutrons (accept Neutron star(s))

(13) The cascade causing this process activates several tissue factors, and infants are
often given shots of vitamin K to enhance this process. Drugs such as heparin [[HEP-ah-rin]]
and warfarin [[WOHR-fuh-rin]] inhibit this process. When this process occurs inside the
body it is known as thrombosis. The inability to induce this process characterizes
hemophilia. For the point, name this process which stops bleeding using platelets.

ANSWER: Blood clotting (or Coagulation; or Coagulating)

(14) Lucian Smith disputed the patent for this product, for which Henry Rose helped
inspire "the Winner" version. John "Bet-a-Million" Gates popularized the use of this material
while William Ednborn made a humane version. This material was contested in the Range
and Fence Cutting Wars, and Joseph Glidden, who donated land for NIU, helped create this
material. Forming obstacles in trench warfare, for the point, what is this type of steel wire
with sharp points?

ANSWER: Barbed wire (accept Bobbed wire)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                           Science Bee 2 - Round 2


(15) Notation for fractions developed in this country includes fractional expansions for
rational numbers of the form "two divided by n" and provides the solution to the rope-
burner timing puzzle. This country used the ancient hekat unit of measurement, and the
Rhind papyrus shows this country's mathematics using hieroglyphs. For the point, name
this country in which the discredited Horus-eye fractions symbol originated.

ANSWER: Egypt

(16) A branch of medicine named for this scientist explains the spread of antibiotic
resistance among bacteria. This scientist proved seeds could survive long journeys in
saltwater, and he noted the anatomical similarities between giant South American fossils
and living sloths. Thick beaks for cracking seeds but pointed beaks for catching insects are
adaptations this man observed in his namesake Galapagos finches. For the point, name this
man who posited the theory of evolution by natural selection.

ANSWER: Charles Robert Darwin

(17) This element is most commonly mined from the mineral cinnabar. When bonded to
a methyl group, this element forms a biotoxin which commonly accumulates in seafood.
Alloys formed with this element are known as amalgams, and atmospheric pressure can be
measured in "millimeters of" this element. For the point, name this element, a metal that is
liquid at room temperature.

ANSWER: Mercury (accept Hg; accept Quicksilver)

(18) The rank and depth of this substance are correlated in Hilt's Law. Strip mining is
done at banded deposits of this substance called its namesake "seams." The Carboniferous
[[kar-boh-NIH-fer-us]] period is partially named from the Latin for this substance. Lignite is
turned into types of this substance like its “bituminous” [[bih-TOO-mih-nus]] type, or
anthracite. For the point, name this black, sedimentary rock formed from plant matter
which is burned for energy.

ANSWER: Coal (accept Bituminous coal; accept Black coal)

(19) Description acceptable. Animals involved in this contest included Ham, Enos, and
Laika, and one competitor in this contest launched the Vostok program. Major achievements
during this contest included the flight of Yuri Gagarin, the landing of Neil Armstrong and
Buzz Aldrin on the Moon, and the creation of NASA. For the point, name this competition
between two Cold War opponents to achieve superiority in exploring beyond Earth.

ANSWER: Space Race (accept answers describing the contest between the Soviet Union and
the United States to achieve greater spaceflight capability)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                             Science Bee 2 - Round 2


(20) Doppler spectroscopy is a common way to find these objects, the least massive of
which is Draugr. Bellerophon [[beh-LEH-roh-fun]] is a prototype for "hot Jupiters," which
are examples of these objects. TRAPPIST-1 is a system with several of these objects, and
dimming can be observed when looking for these objects using the transit method.
Habitable examples of these objects could be present in the Goldilocks zone. For the point,
name these objects which orbit stars that are not the sun.

ANSWER: Exoplanets (accept Extrasolar planets; prompt on "planet(s)"; accept answers
indicating planets not in the solar system)

(21) Bony projections in these organs are used to filter food from them and are known as
the "rakers" of these organs. In some animals, fluid flow in these organs induces counter-
current gas exchange. Human fetuses possess folds that were once mistaken for this organ
but actually become the jaws and ears. In an example of neoteny [[nee-AH-ten-ee]], the
axolotl salamander retains these organs into adulthood. For the point, name these organs
used by fish to extract oxygen from water.

ANSWER: Gills (or Branchiae)

(22) Three of these objects meet in a configuration called the triple junction, such as a
ridge-ridge-ridge example of these objects in a triangle named for the African region of Afar.
The Nazca and Cocos are two of these objects, which are composed of felsic rock. A small
example of one of these objects named for Juan de Fuca formed the Cascade Range. For the
point, name these objects which are pieces of the Earth's crust and are prone to shifting.

ANSWER: Tectonic plates (accept Nazca plate; accept Cocos plate; accept Juan de Fuca
plate)

(23) Scientists studying these objects were awarded the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics, one
of whom was Roger Penrose who proposed extracting energy from the ergospheres of these
objects. These objects lose mass through Hawking radiation, and a supermassive one of
these objects exists at the center of the Milky Way. For the point, names these astronomical
bodies which have a gravitational singularity so strong that light cannot escape past their
event horizon.

ANSWER: Black holes

(24) The first female tourist to this region was the namesake of the Ansari X Prize. The
short-lived MirCorp would have brought travelers to this area, to which Dennis Tito became
the first paying tourist in 2001. 2021 may finally see customers who paid $300,000 each to
Virgin Galactic fly past the ISS in this area, though most planned trips are suborbital. For the
point, Jeff Bezos's Blue Origin will use vertical takeoff to bring tourists to what mostly
empty region above Earth's atmosphere?

ANSWER: Outer Space (accept International Space Station)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                           Science Bee 2 - Round 2


(25) Slubice [[swoo-BEE-tseh]], Poland, created a monument to this organization in
Frankfurt Square. In 2002, Rambot was used as an automated program that modified this
organization's work. All of the pages on this website were blacked out for one day in 2012
to protest the SOPA law. This organization suffers from edit warring and reliability issues.
Larry Sanger and Jimmy Wales founded, for the point, what online encyclopedia?

ANSWER: Wikipedia.org

(26) Namesake banded formations of this element alternate layers of its oxides with
chert and were formed during the Precambrian. Hydrogen peroxide and this element make
up a catalyst that cleans wastewater called Fenton's reagent. This element is the input of the
Bessemer process, which uses the “pig” type of this element. This element’s ores include
hematite and magnetite. For the point, name this ferromagnetic element with chemical
symbol Fe [[EFF-EE]].

ANSWER: Iron (accept Ferrum before "Fe")

(27) Alfasols and gelisols [[JEH-lih-sahls]] are examples of this substance, and
pedogenesis is the formation of this material. Humus [[HYOO-muss]] is organic material
deposited on this substance, which is divided into horizons including O, A, and B. Loam
[[LOW-um]] is a type of this substance, and clay, silt, and sand are components of this
material, as shown on a texture triangle diagram. Hydroponics does not use, for the point,
what substance to which roots anchor plants?

ANSWER: Soil (accept reasonable equivalents such as Dirt)

(28) For two decades, Bushman was the most famous resident of one of these institutions
in Chicago's Lincoln Park. Immersion exhibits at these places help reduce behaviors like
pacing and head-bobbing. These sites saved the golden lion tamarin through captive
breeding programs, and in 1972, the "National" example accepted two giant pandas from
China. Outside Australia, most koalas live in the San Diego example of, for the point, what
institutions which display wild animals to the public?

ANSWER: Zoos (accept Zoological Parks; accept Zoological Gardens; accept Lincoln Park
Zoo; accept National Zoological Park; accept San Diego Zoo)

(29) Transpiration has the largest effect on weather in this ecosystem, one example of
which can be divided zoologically by Wallace's line. The birds of paradise are native to this
biome which is also home to many arboreal mammals like orangutans and sloths. Bark
gouging to feed on gum is a behavior of marmosets in the canopy of this biome. High
temperature and frequent precipitation are key features of, for the point, what equatorial
ecosystem which includes the Congo and Amazon?

ANSWER: Tropical rainforests (or Jungles; accept specific rainforests before they are
mentioned)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                         Science Bee 2 - Round 2


(30) One type of these structures, spread out into large bulb-like lobes on plains, is
known as "piedmont." Asymmetric hills that look like half-buried eggs are left behind by
these features, as are long, winding ridges called eskers. Lateral and medial moraines are
formed from rock transported by these features which can also create fjords, and calving of
these structures forms icebergs. For the point, name these slowly moving bodies of ice.

ANSWER: Glaciers (accept Piedmont glaciers)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                          Science Bee 2 - Round 2


Extra Question
(1)     An early conception of this entity was called the telluric helix, and this entity was
refined by Julius Lothar Meyer. The only two objects among the nearly 120 organized by
this entity which were named after people who were alive at the time of their naming are
oganesson and seaborgium. For the point, name this entity whose modern form is
attributed to Dmitri Mendeleev, a tabular display of chemical elements.

ANSWER: Periodic table of the elements
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                           Science Bee 2 - Round 4



Science Bee 2 - Round 4
Round 4 Tossups
(1)     Known in the 19th century as Heine-Medin disease, this disease remains active in
the wild only in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Drinker and Shaw developed a negative pressure
ventilator in 1928 in response to pervasive outbreaks of this disease. In 1921, Franklin
Delano Roosevelt was diagnosed with this disease, leaving him confined to a wheelchair.
For the point, name this disease, whose first vaccine was developed by Jonas Salk.

ANSWER: Poliomyelitis

(2)     This is the simplest non-aldehyde molecule that can form an enol through a
tautomerization reaction. A cooling bath at negative 78 degrees Celsius is created by mixing
dry ice with this polar aprotic solvent, which consists of a carbonyl group bonded to two
methyl groups. This three-carbon compound is commonly used to clean laboratory
glassware. For the point, name this simplest ketone often found in nail polish remover.

ANSWER: Acetone (or Propanone)

(3)     The hypothetical object Nemesis is said to pass by this region once every 26 million
years, and the inner part of this region is named after Jack G. Hills. This region may be as
much as four thousand times farther from Earth than the Kuiper [[KAI-per]] belt and is
postulated to be the outermost edge of the solar system. For the point, name this region
which is named after a Dutch astronomer, from which comets are thought to originate.

ANSWER: Öpik–Oort cloud

(4)    The WKB method can be applied to this man's namesake equation, which governs
the wave function of a quantum-mechanical system. This man designed a thought
experiment to ridicule the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. This man's
theoretical experiment involved a Geiger counter, poison, and an animal inside a box. For
the point, name this Austrian physician who demonstrated superposition using his
namesake cat.

ANSWER: Erwin Schrödinger [[SHRER-ding-uh]] (be lenient on pronunciation; accept
Schrödinger's equation; accept Schrödinger's cat)

(5)    The hyperbolic form of this function defines a catenary curve. A law named for this
function states that "c squared equals a squared plus b squared minus two times a times b
times this function of angle C." This function of "x" is the reciprocal of secant of "x." This
function of "x squared plus sine of x squared" is always equal to one. For a triangle, this
function is equal to adjacent over hypotenuse. For the point, name this trigonometric
function contrasted with sine of "x."

ANSWER: Cosine of x
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                            Science Bee 2 - Round 4


(6)     Some protists engage in this process in a transversal or longitudinal fashion. When
this process occurs in some higher organisms like tapeworms, it is called strobilation.
Enzymes begin this process at the origin of replication. Once this process has begun, the cell
will begin to elongate to make room for the duplicated material. This process is completed
after that duplicated material separates. For the point, identify this type of cell division
which takes place in most bacteria?

ANSWER: Binary fission

(7)     This scientist’s namesake law states that an increase in acid leads to an increase in
air temperature and concerns the greenhouse effect. The Eyring [[EYE-ring]] equation
modifies this scientist’s namesake equation, which contains the pre-exponential factor
symbolized "A." This man defined acids as species that form hydronium in solution. For the
point, name this Swedish chemist whose namesake equation relates activation energy to
reaction rate.

ANSWER: Svante Arrhenius [[ah-RAY-nyuss]] (accept Arrhenius's law; accept Arrhenius's
equation)

(8)    The surface of a location where this process occurs is an arc-trench complex. A
shallow angle is present in the "flat slab" form of this process. Earthquakes are generated in
Wadati-Benioff zones, in which this process is frequent. Many regions in which this process
occurs are found in the Pacific Ocean’s Ring of Fire. For the point, name this process which
happens when one tectonic plate goes below another at a namesake “zone.”

ANSWER: Subduction (accept Flat slab subduction; accept Subduction zone(s))

(9)     This feature is located off the western edge of the Tharsis plateau, part of the Valles
[[VAH-less]] Marineris canyon. This feature's name was changed after the Mariner 9
spacecraft imaged it. In 2011, Rheasilvia [[ray-ah-SILL-vyah]] on the asteroid Vesta was
found to be of similar height to this mountain, thus competing with it as the highest
mountain in the solar system. For the point, name this shield volcano on Mars with a height
of over 20 kilometers.

ANSWER: Olympus Mons

(10) Centipede Serum contains Extremis virus and this type of energy, emitted by all
inmates of The Cube on Earth-8096. In one film, the Tesseract can be tracked because it
generates this form of energy, to which all Agents of S.M.A.S.H. were exposed. Samuel Sterns
and Emil Blonsky became the Leader and the Abomination, respectively, after absorbing, for
the point, what type of radiation from the radioactive decay of the atomic nucleus which
transformed Bruce Banner into the Incredible Hulk?

ANSWER: Gamma radiation (accept Gamma rays; accept Gamma energy)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                          Science Bee 2 - Round 4


(11) This principle is represented by an inequality in which the product of the
variance of position and momentum must be equal or more than the reduced Planck
constant divided by two. According to this principle, it is impossible to (*)
simultaneously measure a particle's position and momentum. This principle is often
confused with the related observer effect. For the point, name this principle in quantum
mechanics, sometimes named after a German physicist.

ANSWER: Heisenberg('s) uncertainty principle

(12) Inclusion-cell disease is a namesake “storage disease” of this organelle which stems
from phosphotransferase’s inability to transfer phosphate to mannose. After their creation,
parts of the cytoplasm are delivered by the autophagosome [[aw-toh-FAY-joh-sohm]] to this
organelle which carries out its central function via hydrolytic enzymes. For the point, name
this organelle which disposes of waste.

ANSWER: Lysosomes

(13) This constant multiplied by the charge of an electron equals Faraday’s constant. This
constant is sometimes called the Loschmidt [[LOH-shmit]] constant. Silicon is used to
determine the value of this constant, and the gas constant "R" is equal to Boltzmann’s
constant times this constant. For the point, name this constant which is approximately equal
to 6.022 times 10 to the 23rd, the number of molecules in a mole of substance.

ANSWER: Avogadro’s number (accept "constant" in place of "number")

(14) In analysis, this man found a creative solution by equating the power series
expansion of the sine function to its factored form, allowing him to state that the sum of
reciprocals of squares was "pi squared over 6." This man proved that there was no solution
to a problem involving the Pregel River and the seven bridges of Königsberg [[KER-nigs-
burg]]. This man created the notation for the constant "e." For the point, name this prolific
Swiss mathematician.

ANSWER: Leonhard Euler [[OY-lehr]]

(15) This writer explored the danger of implanting neurostimulators in his second novel,
The Terminal Man. This author was criticized when his novel State of Fear seemed to deny
climate change, though his story of a silicon pathogen from space, The Andromeda Strain, is
considered a modern sci-fi classic. An island of cloned dinosaurs was invented by, for the
point, which author of Jurassic Park?

ANSWER: Michael Crichton
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                          Science Bee 2 - Round 4


(16) The ILLIAC I computer studied this object, as did Donald B. Gillies. The GURVO, or
R7, Rocket was planned to be used with this object which was first envisioned as "Object D."
The creation of this object was proposed from plans that Dimitri Ustinov and Sergei Korolev
created. In Operation Moonwatch, observers sited this satellite. Prompting the Space Race,
for the point, what was this Soviet Satellite launched in 1957?

ANSWER: Prosteyshiy Sputnik-1 (prompt on "Satellite 1," "Elementary Satellite 1," or "PS-
1")

(17) A book written by this person was the subject of H.F. van Emden and David Peakall's
1996 Beyond that book. This scientist's breakthrough publication was the nonfiction book
The Sea Around Us. This scientist's best known book argued for calling chemical pesticides
"biocides" due to their damage to the environment. For the point, name this American
biologist and environmentalist, who described the effects of DDT in the book Silent Spring.

ANSWER: Rachel Carson

(18) This quantity divided by surface area is used to calculate surface tension. This
quantity can be calculated as enthalpy minus the product of temperature and entropy.
When the change in this quantity is less than zero for a reaction, the reaction will be
spontaneous. For the point, name this thermodynamic quantity which at constant
temperature and pressure, represents maximum reversible work that can be done,
symbolized "G."

ANSWER: Gibbs free energy

(19) The 89 version of this language is ANSI supported, and unlike an update of this
language which uses "new" and "delete," this language allocates and frees memory through
"malloc" and "free." GCC compiles this language which was developed by Dennis Ritchie at
Bell Labs as a way to implement utilities and the kernel of Unix [[YOO-niks]]. For the point,
name this programming language which was updated with objects in a "Plus Plus" version.

ANSWER: C

(20) This scientist expanded upon Henri Becquerel's work on uranium salts emitting
rays, and to do so, used the electrometer, which was invented by her husband. While
investigating ore pitchblende, this scientist discovered an element, polonium, which she
named after her country of birth. This woman also discovered radium with her husband,
Pierre. For the point, name this Polish scientist who coined the term "radioactivity."

ANSWER: Marie Curie
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                            Science Bee 2 - Round 4


(21) Muscled appendages in these organisms include pedicellaria [[peh-deh-ceh-LAH-
ree-uh]]. Ophiuroidea [[oh-fee-yoo-ROY-dee-ah]] is a class in this phylum named for being
"brittle." Tube feet allow organisms in this phylum to attach to surfaces, and one organism
in this phylum uses Aristotle’s lantern to feed. Sand dollars belong to this phylum, some of
whose organisms have five-fold radial symmetry. For the point, name this marine phylum
which includes sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and starfish.

ANSWER: Echinodermata (or Echinoderms)

(22) Because they use these interactions, alpha helices and beta sheets are secondary
structures. These interactions are found between pyrimidines [[pih-RIH-mih-deen]] and
purines [[PYOO-reens]] in DNA, such as three of them formed between cytosine [[SAI-toh-
seen]] and guanine [[GWAH-neen]]. These interactions are responsible for the structure of
water and its high surface tension and cohesion. For the point, name these interactions
which form between fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen and its namesake element with atomic
number one.

ANSWER: Hydrogen bonds

(23) Luhman 16 is a binary system of two of these objects, the closest-known of these
objects to Earth. M, L, T, and Y are spectral classifications of these objects, and the
spectroscopic lithium test is used to characterize these objects. These objects have masses
of about 13 to 80 times the mass of Jupiter. For the point, name these so-called “failed stars”
which do not have enough mass to perform hydrogen fusion.

ANSWER: Brown dwarfs (prompt on "star(s)")

(24) At this university's Cavendish Laboratory, Max Perutz used x-ray crystallography to
find the structure of hemoglobin. J. J. Thomson's cathode ray experiments at this institution
led to the discovery of the electron. Lucasian Professors of Mathematics at this university
have included Stephen Hawking and Isaac Newton. Second only to Harvard in number of
Nobel laureates, for the point, what is this British university, the longtime rival of Oxford?

ANSWER: University of Cambridge (accept Cambridge University)

(25) The formation of these molecules from alpha-olefins is facilitated by Ziegler-Natta
catalysts. The "dispersity" of these molecules describes their mass distribution. These
molecules can be formed by step-growth or chain growth, and common examples of these
molecules include rubber and plastic. For the point, name these macromolecules formed by
repeating units called monomers.

ANSWER: Polymers
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                          Science Bee 2 - Round 4


(26) Some members of this phylum utilize an operculum [[oh-PER-kyoo-lum]] to close off
a calcified structure. Most members of this phylum possess a tongue-like feeding structure
called a radula [[RAD-yoo-luh]]. Members of this phylum possess a body mantle, which
secretes calcium carbonate and conchiolin [[kon-KAI-oh-lin]] to form a hard shell. Major
groups within this phylum include bivalves and cephalopods. For the point, name this
phylum of invertebrate animals which includes squids, octopuses, and snails.

ANSWER: Mollusca (or Mollusks)

(27) This language was used to compose the medieval textbook The Canon of Medicine by
Avicenna [[ah-vee-SEH-nah]]. A treatise on mechanical inventions, The Book of Ingenious
Devices, was written in this language at the House of Wisdom. Terms like "alcohol" and
"algebra" are derived from this language, as are Rigel [[RYE-jel]], Deneb, and most other
star names. The ten digits used by the West were transmitted from India via, for the point,
which language of many historical Islamic scholars?

ANSWER: Arabic (or al-arabiyyah)

(28) This concept was incorrectly understood by Aristotle, but the Chinese philosopher
Mozi showed a better understanding of this concept in the same time period. Islamic
scientists demonstrated an understanding of this concept five centuries before Galileo and
Copernicus began to describe it in relation to planetary motion. Kepler first used this term,
but Newton never used the term even though he is most associated with this concept. For
the point, what is this resistance to change in an object’s motion, often explained as “An
object in motion will stay in motion.”

ANSWER: Inertia

(29) This mineral is found at the bottom of the Goldich dissolution series, because it has
high stability on Earth’s surface. The shocked type of this mineral that has a varied
microstructure is formed from meteor impacts. A crystal of this mineral is found in watches,
because it is piezoelectric [[pee-eh-zoh-ee-LEK-trik]]. This mineral has a value of seven on
the Mohs hardness scale. For the point, name this mineral composed of silicon dioxide,
which is found in sand.

ANSWER: Quartz (accept Shocked quartz)

(30) The conductivity of these cells is improved by being coated in myelin by Schwann
cells. These cells are supported by glial [[GLEE-ull]] cells, which include oligodendrocytes
and astrocytes. These cells demonstrate "plasticity" through pruning and long-term
potentiation. These cells connect to each other through axons and dendrites and
communicate with chemicals such as dopamine and serotonin across their synapses. For the
point, name these cells which make up the nervous system.

ANSWER: Neurons (accept Nerve cell before "nervous system")
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                         Science Bee 2 - Round 4


Extra Question
(1)     This particle names a technique for which the 2017 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was
awarded. Photons cause the emission of these particles in the photoelectric effect. The
charge of these subatomic particles was determined by the Millikan oil drop experiment. J.J.
Thomson described these particles floating in a positively-charged medium in his “plum
pudding” model of the atom. For the point, name these negatively charged particles which
orbit the nucleus.

ANSWER: Electrons (accept Cryo-electron microscopy)
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                          Round 3



                                            Round 3
Regulation

(Tossup 1) A severe reaction to this condition is known as anaphylaxis and can be treated with an
epinephrine injection. This condition is caused by increased histamine levels which can lead to hives,
runny nose, and in severe cases, an inability to breathe. For the point, name this condition triggered by
the immune system’s response to a foreign substance – such as peanuts, dust, or pollen.
ANSWER: allergies (or allergy; accept specific types)

(Tossup 2) One application of this physical principle involves aligning an ultrasound signal parallel to
blood flow in an artery to measure the speed and direction of blood flow. Another application of this
principle allows weather radar to accurately determine the speed and direction of storms without having
to rely on repeated imaging. For the point, identify this principle also used to determine the expansion of
the universe by detecting red shifts in the light from galaxies, a physical principle named for an Austrian
scientist.
ANSWER: Doppler effect (accept Doppler shift)


(Tossup 3) These substances are trapped by a stable one called TEMPO in EPR spectroscopy. These
substances, which are created by homolysis, are drawn with single barbed fish-hook arrows. These
substances, such as superoxide, cause damage when they build up in cells. For the point, name these
highly reactive substances with unpaired electrons that are protected against by anti-oxidants.
ANSWER: free radicals


(Tossup 4) These objects are subject to the void coefficient of reactivity. Fast neutrons can be produced
by fission via these objects. These objects produce energy through a thorium fuel cycle or other methods
of radioactive decay. For the point, name these devices that can suffer meltdowns that release radiation.
ANSWER: nuclear reactors


(Tossup 5) Epistasis occurs when one of these units depends on the presence of another. The locus gives
the position of these units and can help determine whether two of these units are linked. The ratio of these
units in offspring can be determined using a Punnet Square, and laws of their inheritance were formulated
by Gregor Mendel on pea plants. For the point, name these units of DNA that encode phenotypes.
ANSWER: genes (accept genotype; prompt on locus before mentioned)


(Tossup 6) These events are predicted by pressure recorders in the DART system. Abrupt deformation
of the sea floor can cause a vertical displacement resulting in one of these events. In 2004, an earthquake
along the Burma Plate and the Indian Plate caused one of these catastrophic events in the Indian Ocean.
For the point, name these large waves with a Japanese name which can devastate coastal regions.
ANSWER: tsunamis (prompt on tidal wave; prompt on seismic sea wave)




                                                  Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                           Round 3


(Tossup 7) This term describes a matrix whose elements are given by the Kronecker delta and has ones
on the main diagonal and zeros elsewhere. Multiplying an element by its inverse gives this term, which is
one for multiplication. For the point, give this term that names a property stating that any number times
one is equal to itself.
ANSWER: Identity


(Tossup 8) These creatures of the subclass Hirudinea were used in a practice meant to restore the
balance of “humours” in the body. These annelids create a Y-shape mark when they bite. To collect these
creatures, old animals would be walked through wetlands so these creatures could bite them. For the
point, name these bloodsucking parasites that were used to draw blood in medieval medicine.
ANSWER: leeches


(Tossup 9) Paul Dirac hypothesized that the age of this entity is inversely proportional to the gravitational
constant. This entity is thought to be flat because measurements of the density parameter omega are very
close to one. The acceleration of this entity is thought to be caused by dark energy, and possible endings
to it include heat death. For the point, name this entity that was created by the Big Bang.
ANSWER: the universe


(Tossup 10) Fowler’s solution, a compound containing potassium, oxygen, and this element was once
used as a tonic. With the element gallium, this element forms a common semiconductor. A test using zinc
and nitric acid is used to detect the presence of this element. That test is the Marsh test. This element
was used in the so called “magic bullet” drug Salvarsan, the first effective treatment for syphilis. For the
point, name this toxic element once used as a rat poison with symbol As.
ANSWER: arsenic (accept As before it is read)


(Tossup 11) This molecule’s inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase is the reason it quickly leads to death
after inhalation. When this molecule is a part of an organic compound as a functional group, it is known
as a nitrile. This molecule can sometimes smell of “bitter almonds.” It consists of a carbon atom triple
bonded to an element to the immediate right of carbon on the periodic table. For the point, name this
poison found in apple seeds with chemical formula CN minus.
ANSWER: cyanide (accept CN minus before it is read)


(Tossup 12) Many messenger RNAs contain a sequence of nucleotides known as the “response element”
of this metal. Deficiency in this element is the most common nutritional deficiency in the world and can
lead to its namesake form of anemia. This element is found in heme, and gives hemoglobin its affinity for
oxygen. For the point, name this element with atomic number 26 and atomic symbol Fe.
ANSWER: iron (accept Fe before it is read)




                                                   Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                          Round 3


(Tossup 13) On the Koppen climate classification, this climate is classified as BWh and BWk. The cold
varities of these climates typically occur in the rain shadow of high mountains. This climate occupies
about one-third of global land surface and is characterized by great aridity. For the point, name this hot,
dry climate that receives little rainfall and is typically known for having vast amounts of sand.
ANSWER: the desert


(Tossup 14) These numbers have a closed-form solution known as Binet’s Formula. The limit of the ratio
of these numbers is equal to phi, the golden ratio. These numbers are defined recursively as the sum of
the two previous terms. For the point, name this set of numbers which begins 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5.
ANSWER: Fibonacci numbers (accept Fibonacci sequence)


(Tossup 15) The floor function returns the greatest element of this set of numbers less than the input.
Diophantine equations always have solutions in this set of numbers. The symbol for this set of numbers is
a blackboard bold Z. For the point, name this set of numbers that includes the whole numbers as well as
the negative numbers.
ANSWER: integers


(Tossup 16) Early pioneering work on chaos theory was done by Edward Lorenz while studying the
pattern of this entity on a digital computer. A company called “[this entity] underground” gives real-time
updates on it. This entity is a catch-all term for phenomenon occurring primarily in the troposphere.
For the point, name this state of the atmosphere which scientists try to “forecast” through readings of
temperature and precipitation activity.
ANSWER: weather (do not accept or prompt on climate)


(Tossup 17) The Frasch process is used to produce an allotrope with this many sulfur atoms, known as
a “puckered ring.” There are this many hydrogen atoms in propane. With the exception of helium, noble
gases usually have this many valence electrons. For the point, identify the number of carbons in octane.
ANSWER: eight


(Tossup 18) The radial velocity method of detecting these objects, involving small Doppler shifts, was the
first successful method used to find these objects. In recent years, changes in brightness can help detect
these objects by using variations of the transit method. Poltergeist and Phobetor [foh-beh-tor] were the
first of these objects to be confirmed. For the point, identify these objects, of which over 4,000 have been
discovered orbiting stars other than our sun.
ANSWER: Exoplanets (accept extrasolar planets)




                                                  Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                        Round 3


(Tossup 19) One of these statements is an early statement of demonstrating that change in momentum
is equal to the impulse imparted to an object. Another of these statements is an early statement of
the conservation of momentum in terms of paired forces. One of these statements discusses the cause of
acceleration being an outside unbalanced force applied to an object. For the point, identify this trio of
statements which explain fundamental motion of objects as first written in the Principia by the man who
also proposed the Law of Universal Gravitation.
ANSWER: Newton’s Three Laws of Motion


(Tossup 20) Dangerously powerful storms on this landmass that can cut between mountain passes are
locally known as “Herbies” and primarily impact the region surrounding McMurdo Sound. The largest
known oceanic current flows clockwise around this landmass. Krill named for this landmass are probably
the most abundant species on the planet. For the point, name this continent located at the South pole.
ANSWER: Antarctica


(Tossup 21) These objects are classified as C-type, S-type or M-type based on their spectral lines, and
their astronomical symbol is a generic numbered disc. Large examples of these objects include Pallas and
Vesta. These objects get their name from the Greek for “star-like.” For the point, name these rocks that
make up a namesake belt between Mars and Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroids (accept asteroid belt)


(Tossup 22) This organ contains the smallest muscle in the human body, the stapedius. The Organ of
Corti helps translate signals to the brain in the cochlea [coke-lee-ah] of this organ’s inner portion. The
middle portion of this organ contains the malleus, incus, and stapes, which are better known as the
“hammer,” “anvil” and “stirrup.” For the point, name this organ that allows you to hear.
ANSWER: ears (accept inner/middle/outer ear)


(Tossup 23) This organelle binds to a Shine-Dalgarno sequence upstream of a sequence which codes for
methionine. A, P, and E sites transport tRNA molecules through these organelles, which are found in
the cytoplasm or attached to rough endoplasmic reticulum. For the point, name these organelles which
synthesize proteins.
ANSWER: Ribosomes


(Tossup 24) J.P. Morgan withdrew funding from this man’s Wardenclyffe Tower after this man offered to
provide free energy to humanity. This man names a company led by Elon Musk. The SI unit for magnetic
flux density is named after, for the point, what Serbian-American scientist who studied electricity with
his namesake coil?
ANSWER: Nikola Tesla




                                                 Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                            Round 3


(Tossup 25) The U.S. Army secretly sprayed nerve gas trails in the sky to kill thousands of these animals
in Utah’s Skull Valley. One of these animals was named 6LLS and was part of the Finnish Dorset breed.
That animal was Dolly, who was the first mammal to be cloned. For the point, name these animals,
commonly kept for their wool.
ANSWER: sheep


(Tossup 26) Zeno formulated one of these constructs involving the movement of an arrow. Considering
the set of all sets that do not contain themselves leads to one of these statements named for Russell. The
liar’s version of this construct involves the declaration “this sentence is a lie.” For the point, name these
apparently self-contradictory statements.
ANSWER: paradoxes


(Tossup 27) Cotton fibers are almost exclusively made of this molecule. This molecule is the necessary
chemical to act as the stationary phase in thin layer chromatography. Humans cannot digest this
polysaccharide, but with the help of gut bacteria, cows and termites can. For the point, identify this
polysaccharide, the most common naturally occurring organic polymer on Earth, known for being the
main component of the cell walls of terrestrial plants.
ANSWER: cellulose


(Tossup 28) A cambered airfoil will experience more of this force than a flat airfoil, even at lower angles
of attack. In some high performance and racing cars, this force is directed downward. This force is often
incorrectly explained as a simple pressure difference cause by Bernoulli’s [ber-noo-lees] Principle. For the
point, identify this force, one of the four principle forces that operate on aircraft which causes aircraft to
accelerate upwards.
ANSWER: lift


(Tossup 29) This tissue begins forming in early development when aggrecan and Type 2 collagen are
secreted to form an extracellular matrix. Because the cells which produce these tissues are bound to
particular locations, this tissue is difficult to repair when damaged. Chondrocytes [kon-droh-sights] are
found in, for the point, what tissue that makes up inter-vertebral disks as well as human ears and noses?
ANSWER: cartilage


(Tossup 30) This biome is home to bogs known as muskeg. This biome experiences unequal temperature
distributions called thermokarst. Trees like the Douglas fir are adapted to this biome’s high moisture
levels. The tree line marks the end of this biome and the start of tundra. For the point, name this largest
terrestrial biome known as boreal forest.
ANSWER: Taiga (accept boreal forest before it is read)




                                                   Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                   Round 3


Replacements

(Tossup 31) These functional groups are products of reactions named after Ullmann and Williamson. A
cyclic variety of these compounds are known as their namesake “crown.” Its diethyl type was commonly
used as an anesthetic. For the point, name these compounds consisting of an oxygen atom bonded to two
alkyl or aryl groups.
ANSWER: Ether

(Tossup 32) This technique is conducted before the transfer step of a Southern blot. Molecular weight
determines the migration rate of this technique. A carcinogenic dye called ethidium bromide helps to
visualize this technique, which relies on an agarose matrix. For the point, name this technique which
separates DNA using an electric field.
ANSWER: Gel electrophoresis




                                               Page 6
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                             Round 3



                                              Round 3
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Irving Langmuir created a probe to measure this substance which can be confined in a powerful
magnetic field inside a torus-shaped device called a tokamak. This substance makes up an aurora borealis
and exists in the interior of the sun. This form of matter is responsible for conducting the electricity in
lightning and can be generated by ionizing gas. For the point, name this fourth state of matter.
ANSWER: plasma

(Tossup 2) In one competition at the World Games, competitors find control points using the “thumb”
and “protractor” varieties of this device. This device works using a magnet’s tendency to align with the
Earth’s magnetic field. For the point, name this device that helps explorers determine which direction is
north.
ANSWER: compass (accept thumb compass; accept protractor compass; accept magnetic compass)


(Tossup 3) Dark green spots appear in this material’s “disease” due to a reaction with chlorides. August
Rodin was accused of casting a live model to create a sculpture named for this material. The age named
for this material was between the Neolithic age and the Iron age. Despite containing zinc, brass is often
confused for this alloy. For the point, name this material, an alloy of 90% copper and 10% tin.
ANSWER: bronze


(Tossup 4) A fractal made of this shape is named after Sierpinski, and one of these shapes named after
Blaise Pascal. The ratio of the length of different sides of these shapes defines the sine, cosine, and tangent
functions used in trigonometry. Its internal angles sum to 180 degrees and it can be acute, obtuse, or
right. For the point, name this shape that has three angles and three sides.
ANSWER: triangle


(Tossup 5) Alkenes are characterized by having a carbon with this many bonds to another carbon. Pi
bonds are formed between atoms with at least this many bonds. A molecule of nitrogen gas contains this
many nitrogen atoms, and table salt contains this many unique elements. Helium has this atomic number.
A molecule of water contains, for the point, how many hydrogen atoms?
ANSWER: two


(Tossup 6) People without the Duffy antigen are immune to a form of this disease. The parasites that
cause this disease can enter a dormant hypnozoite state before invading red blood cells. Artemisinins have
outpaced the use of quinine in treating this disease, which is primarily caused by the vivax and falciparum
species of Plasmodium parasites. For ten points, name this infectious disease spread by female Anopheles
mosquitoes.
ANSWER: malaria




                                                   Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 3


(Tossup 7) Though these particles are theorized to decay, this has not been confirmed by any observations
yet. Two of these particles form a chain reaction responsible for fusion in stars. This particle is composed
of two up quarks and one down quark. This particle is equivalent to the H+ ion, which is formed when
acids are added to water. For the point, name this positively-charged particle contrasted with the neutron
and electron.
ANSWER: proton


(Tossup 8) This object was discovered by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, the first object in what was to be
named the Kuiper Belt. This body is orbited by the moon Charon which is nearly half its size. In August
2006, the IAU downgraded the status of this body reducing the number of full-fledged planets in the solar
system. For the point, name this former 9th planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Pluto


(Tossup 9) Purkinje fibers in this organ are connected through the Bundle of His to this organ’s AV
node. The SA node serves as the pacemaker for this organ. The atrium is the smaller upper chamber
of this organ that primes this organ’s ventricles to pump. Most arteries transport away from this organ
while veins head to this organ. For the point, name this organ that circulates blood throughout the body,
blockage of which can lead to its namesake “attack.”
ANSWER: heart (accept heart attack)


(Tossup 10) DPPC reduces this quantity in the alveoli of the lungs which is measured in dynes per
centimeter. Adhesive forces and the cohesion of this property allow for capillary action. Surfactants reduce
the value of this quantity. Corks can float in cups with a convex water line due to this property. For the
point, name this property that allows water striders to move along the top of water.
ANSWER: surface tension (accept water tension; prompt on “tension”)


(Tossup 11) The first part of this structure to be put into place is called Zarya. Peggy Whitson spent
more time living in this structure than any other American. Unity and Destiny are the names of other
parts of this structure, and occupants of this structure might use some of their mandatory exercise
time on a piece of equipment called the COLBERT [kol-bair]. The CSA, JAXA, and the ESA are three
of the organizations which oversee this structure. Crewed continuously since 2000, identify this orbital
laboratory.
ANSWER: International Space Station (accept ISS; prompt on partial answers)


(Tossup 12) Gypsum can form “flowers” and “beards” in these places. “Soda straw” is a very common
speleothem in these places. These places can form from the dissolution of limestone in karst topography.
Mammoth and Carlsbad are two U.S. examples of these places. For the point, name these underground
locations that contain stalagmites and stalactites which are explored by spelunkers.
ANSWER: caves (or caverns)




                                                  Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 3


(Tossup 13) The Van der Waals equation extends an equation used to describe a certain form of this
type of substance. These substances can be modeled as hard spheres, while in another formulation they
are assumed to have no mass and completely elastic collisions. That formulation is the “ideal” for of this
type of matter, while the “greenhouse” variety is responsible for global warming. For the point, name this
phase of matter exemplified by substances like carbon dioxide and water vapor.
ANSWER: gases


(Tossup 14) These devices control the flow of operation with a “kernel.” John Von Neumann names
an architecture for these devices. These devices whose invention was theorized by Charles Babbage use
registers to perform quick computations. RAM is used on these devices to store bits in memory. Linux
and Windows are two operating systems for these devices. For the point, name these devices that can run
programs which can be written using a keyboard.
ANSWER: computers (accept operating system; accept equivalents like laptop)


(Tossup 15) Drugs to treat this condition include cisplatin. Multiple myeloma is the name of this condition
when it affects plasma cells, and if it occurs in bone marrow, it is called leukemia. This condition spreads
by metastasis from malignant tumors. For the point, name this condition of uncontrolled cell division that
is commonly treated with radiation and chemotherapy.
ANSWER: cancer


(Tossup 16) Biosynthesis of carnitine requires this organic molecule, which is used as a cofactor for the
hydroxylation of lysine and proline residues during collagen synthesis. Linus Pauling advocated megadoses
of this antioxidant to prevent the common cold. A disease caused by a lack of this vitamin is marked by
anemia, gum bleeding, and tooth loss, and is called scurvy. For the point, name this vitamin found in high
quantities in citrus fruits.
ANSWER: Vitamin C (accept ascorbic acid)


(Tossup 17) An isthmus made of this material is called a tombolo. Ergs are broad flat lands of this
material that form into hill-like mounds which can be crescent or star-shaped. This material is finer than
gravel but coarser than silt and can be heated to form glass. Wind forms this material into dunes. For the
point, name this material found in the desert and on beaches.
ANSWER: sand (accept sand dunes; prompt on dunes)


(Tossup 18) Lyonization can convert one form of these structures into a Barr body. To avoid death, cancer
cells extend the ends of these structures, which are called telomeres. Spindle fibers bind to centromeres
on these structures to pull them apart during anaphase. A karyotype can visualize the 23 pairs of these
structures found in human cells. Males have one X and one Y form of, for the point, what genetic
structures which contain packaged DNA?
ANSWER: chromosomes (accept X chromosome; accept Y chromosome)




                                                  Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 3


(Tossup 19) Karl von Frisch studied how these organisms communicate the location of food through a
waggle dance. These creatures of the genus Apis will spontaneously migrate in colony collapse disorder.
These creatures are specialized into “drone,” “nurse” and “queen” classes. For the point, name these
organisms whose most famous variety creates honey while helping with pollination.
ANSWER: bees (accept European honeybees; accept Apis mellifera before mentioned)


(Tossup 20) For unit complex numbers, this operation represents a rotation and for a sequence of terms
this operation can be represented by a capital pi. This operation can be carried out on binomials with a
technique called FOIL. The identity element for this operation is 1. For the point, name this operation
which for natural numbers is equivalent to repeated addition.
ANSWER: multiplication


(Tossup 21) Kussmaul breathing can indicate a complication of this condition in which harmful keto-acids
accumulate in the bloodstream. In one form of this disorder, GLUT4 transporters do not respond to a
hormone secreted from the Islets of Langerhans. Its “Type 1” or “juvenile” form occurs when beta cells in
the pancreas cannot secrete insulin, leading to hyperglycemia. For the point, name this disorder marked
by high blood sugar levels.
ANSWER: diabetes (accept diabetes mellitus; accept Type 1 diabetes; accept Type 2 diabetes;
accept diabetic ketoacidosis)


(Tossup 22) This thing is accidentally rejected in a type I error, while accidentally accepted in a type
II error. In statistical testing, one of these statements is “alternative” to the “null” one. The scientific
method requires that this statement be testable. For the point, name this conjecture weaker than a theory
that proposes a possible explanation for a phenomenon.
ANSWER: hypothesis (accept hypotheses; accept null hypothesis; do not accept or prompt on theory)


(Tossup 23) This scientist’s “dangerous idea” was resisted with “skyhooks” according to Daniel Dennett
in a book about his theories. Alfred Russel Wallace independently developed a theory that made this
scientist famous. This man was sailing with Robert Fitzroy on the H.M.S. Beagle when he discovered the
beak patterns of his namesake finches in the Galapagos. For the point, name this author of On the Origin
of Species who proposed the theory of natural selection as a means of evolution.
ANSWER: Charles Darwin (accept Charles Robert Darwin)


(Tossup 24) This mineral’s piezo-electric properties make it useful as a crystal oscillator. This mineral
is found at the bottom of Bowen’s reaction series. This mineral with a Mohs hardness of 7 is the second
most abundant in the Earth’s crust after feldspar. For the point, name this mineral composed of silicon
dioxide whose crystal varieties include jasper and amethyst.
ANSWER: quartz (prompt on Silicon dioxide; prompt on SiO2)




                                                  Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 3


(Tossup 25) When these events form over a body of water they are known as “waterspouts,” and the first
visible stage of their formation is the presence of a mesocyclone. The intensity of these events is measured
by the enhanced Fujita scale. Nebraska and Kansas are in the heart of these events’ namesake “alley.” For
the point, name these columns of intensely spinning wind.
ANSWER: tornadoes (accept twister; prompt on cyclone; prompt on whirlwind; prompt on vortex)


(Tossup 26) This molecule is extracted from plants by using supercritical carbon dioxide. It’s not adenine
or guanine, but this purine has the scientific name 1,3,7-Tri-methyl-xanthine. Adenosine receptors in the
brain recognize this molecule which gives this molecule its central nervous stimulating property. For the
point, name this molecule found in chocolate, tea, and coffee.
ANSWER: caffeine


(Tossup 27) In mass spectrometry, molecules described by this term are formed by breaking apart larger
molecules. Names for molecules described by this term typically end with the suffix “-ate” or “-ite” such
as carbonate or sulfate. Molecules described by this term form bonds held with electrostatic forces. For
the point, name these atoms or molecules with a net charge.
ANSWER: ions (accept charged atoms/molecules before charge is read; accept ionic bond; prompt on
“acid”)


(Tossup 28) The tetracycline family of these medications binds to the 30S ribosomal subunit to block
protein synthesis. One of these substances that Alexander Fleming discovered in mold was among the first
treatments for Streptococcus infections. That drug is penicillin. For the point, name these medications
that fight bacterial infections.
ANSWER: antibiotics (accept antimicrobial drugs; accept antibacterial drugs)


(Tossup 29) Carl Hilt theorized that at lower depths the quality of this material goes up. The anthracite
variety of this substance has the highest amount of carbon resulting in it also providing the most amount
of energy. Workers extracting this material can suffer from Black Lung. For the point, name this black
rock commonly used as an energy source.
ANSWER: Coal


(Tossup 30) The “giant impact hypothesis” holds this body may have been created in the aftermath of a
collision with the planet Theia. This body is home to dark, basalt plains which tricked ancient astronomers
into believing they were made of water. The Sea of Tranquility, the landing point of Apollo 11, is on this
body. For the point, name this body, Earth’s only natural satellite.
ANSWER: Moon (accept Luna)




                                                  Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                       Round 3


Replacements

(Tossup 31) This organ is coated with a mucus-rich alkaline fluid from Brunner’s glands. Projections
in this organ are flattened in Celiac disease. This organ is divided into the ileum, the jejunum, and the
duodenum and it absorbs nutrients through extended projections known as villi. For the point, name this
digestive organ that takes in chyme from the stomach and feeds into the large intestine.
ANSWER: small intestine (prompt on intestine)

(Tossup 32) One supporter of this theory offered $100,000 for anyone who could find a triangle that
could be drawn with three right angles, but “pushed the goal post” when presented with non-Euclidean
geometry by youtuber Wolfie6020. Washington Irving popularized the myth that people believed in this
theory until Christopher Columbus sailed the Pacific Ocean to get to the West Indies. For the point, name
this conspiracy theory that alleges the world is not actually spherical.
ANSWER: Flat Earth theory (accept any description about the theory that the earth isn’t round)




                                                 Page 6
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                           Round 1



                                             Round 1
Regulation

(Tossup 1) In 2016, the project LIGO reported the detection of waves of this force. General relativity
states that this force is responsible for the curvature of spacetime. Of all four fundamental forces, this is
the weakest. Newton formed a universal inverse-square law for this force, which produces an acceleration
of 9.8 meters per second on Earth’s surface. For the point, name this force described by constants big G
and small g, the attraction between two masses.
ANSWER: gravity [accept word forms like gravitation]

(Tossup 2) Using only a heat source, one type of this device without movable parts was invented by Leo
Szilard and Albert Einstein. This device uses a vapor compression cycle that runs through condensing,
evaporating, and compressing phases. Working fluids that helped expand the use of these devices include
chlorofluorocarbons like Freon. The icebox was replaced by, for the point, what household appliance that
keeps food cold?
ANSWER: refrigerators (or fridges)


(Tossup 3) Bernice Eddy discovered that millions of people were injected with cancer-causing monkey
cells from vaccines that targeted this disease. Vaccines for this disease were created by Albert Sabin and
Jonas Salk. Franklin Delano Roosevelt suffered from, for the point, what disease that causes infantile
paralysis?
ANSWER: polio (accept poliomyelitis, prompt on infantile paralysis)


(Tossup 4) Every natural number greater than 1 can be factored into these numbers according to the
fundamental theorem of arithmetic. If two numbers have a greatest common factor of 1, they are said
to be “co-” this property. 2 is the only even number with this property, and they are contrasted with
composite numbers. For the point, name these numbers whose only factors are one and themselves.
ANSWER: prime numbers


(Tossup 5) This particle can’t share the exact same spin state by the Pauli exclusion principle. This
particle, discovered by J.J. Thomson, is present in lone pairs in free radicals. Atoms like to have a certain
number of this particle by the octet rule. This particle is donated in ionic bonds and shared in covalent
bonds. For the point, name this negatively charged particle that circles the nucleus of atoms.
ANSWER: electrons


(Tossup 6) In this organ, vasopressin can stimulate reabsorption of water from collecting ducts. Fluid
that enters this organ diffuses from the glomerulus to a surrounding Bowman’s capsule. Ions are absorbed
by this organ’s Loops of Henle, which are found in thousands of functional units called nephrons. The
ureters connect these organs to the bladder. For the point, identify these bean-shaped organs that filter
blood to produce urine.
ANSWER: kidneys


                                                   Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                        Round 1


(Tossup 7) This force is described by Amonton’s law and is proportional to the normal force on an object.
Drag is the aerodynamic equivalent of this force which comes in static and kinetic forms. This force often
opposes change in motion and can be reduced with lubricants. For the point, name this resistive force,
that generates heat when you rub your hands together.
ANSWER: friction


(Tossup 8) These objects are the subject of the no-hair theorem which holds that they can be characterized
by only their mass, charge, and angular momentum. The mass of one of these objects determines its
Schwarzschild radius and thus its event horizon or “point of no return.” For the point, name these
astronomical objects with singularities at their centers that let nothing, even light, escape.
ANSWER: black holes


(Tossup 9) The replication of this molecule is semi-conservative and it is transcribed in the first step
of the Central Dogma. It is made up of a sugar-phosphate backbone and a sequence of nucleotide
base-pairs formed from adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine. Rosalind Franklin originally discovered
this molecule’s double-helix structure which was then published by Watson and Crick. For the point,
name this molecule that stores information in the genetic code.
ANSWER: DNA (accept deoxyribonucleic acid)


(Tossup 10) An isotope of this element is bombarded with neutrons in a method for producing tritium.
Salts of this element are frequently used to treat psychiatric disorders. This element is sometimes used
to increase the efficiency of smelting aluminum. Ions of this element are frequently used in rechargeable
batteries found in phones and laptops. For the point, name this element with atomic number 3 represented
by the symbol Li.
ANSWER: lithium (accept Li before it is read)


(Tossup 11) Baily’s beads are a visual phenomenon seen during one of these events. An alternating
pattern of dark and light lines called shadow bands are produced immediately before and after one of
these events. A variation of one of these events is called total and results in the darkening of a daytime
sky. For the point, name these astronomical events in which the Sun is at least partially blocked by the
Moon.
ANSWER: Total solar eclipse (prompt on eclipse)


(Tossup 12) The largest fossil of this dinosaur was excavated at the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation
in South Dakota and is nicknamed after its discoverer Sue Hendrickson. That fossil of this dinosaur is
in the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago. This bipedal carnivore had a large head and short
forelimbs. For the point, name this large Cretaceous period dinosaur whose name translates to “Tyrant
Lizard King.”
ANSWER: Tyrannosaurus Rex (accept T-rex)




                                                 Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                           Round 1


(Tossup 13) This element, like Nitrogen, can achieve a liquid form at 4.2 Kelvin and is often used for
overclocking processors. Alpha particles are identical to nuclei of this element, the second most abundant
in the universe. For the point, name this element, often used for inflating balloons, symbolized He.
ANSWER: helium (accept He before it is read)


(Tossup 14) The “singularity” is a hypothesis that the invention of the “super” form of this technology
will trigger growth that may lead to human extinction. Advances in this technology include the creation
of AlphaZero, by DeepMind, that defeated Stockfish in a match of one thousand rounds of chess. Elon
Musk frequently warns about the danger of this technology. IBM’s Watson is an example of, for the point,
what technology of “thinking machines?”
ANSWER: Artificial Intelligence (accept AI; accept ASI; accept artificial superintelligence;
prompt on intelligence)


(Tossup 15) Some species of cuckoo birds participate in the brood form of this relationship by laying eggs
in other birds nests. Helminths and protozoa can cause diseases by establishing this relationship. This
relationship is defined as one species benefiting at the expense of another species. For the point, name this
relationship which fleas, ticks, and tape worms participate in.
ANSWER: parasitism (accept parasites; accept endoparasite; accept brood parasite; accept brood
parasitism)


(Tossup 16) In 1883, John Augustus Roebling designed one of these structures as a cable-stay hybrid
to provide extra support to the deck. The suspended span is supported by anchor arms in the balanced
cantilever variety of these structures. Akashi Kaikyo is the longest suspension variety of these structures.
For the point, name these structures that include the international orange painted Golden Gate one in
San Francisco.
ANSWER: bridges (accept Golden Gate bridge; accept Brooklyn Bridge)


(Tossup 17) This type of rock can be felsic or mafic depending on their chemical composition, and
peridotite is one of them found mainly in the mantle. Examples of them include granite and basalt and
they can be extrusive or intrusive depending on whether they are formed from lava or magma. For the
point, name this class of rocks that is contrasted with sedimentary and metamorphic.
ANSWER: igneous rocks


(Tossup 18) In this structure’s inner membrane, electrons are passed from ubiquinone to cytochrome
c to power oxidative phosphorylation. This organelle contains a circular maternally-inherited genome.
Oxaloacetate combines with acetyl-CoA to begin the citric acid cycle in this organelle, which has folds
called cristae. FtP, name this eukaryotic organelle that generates ATP, the “powerhouse of the cell.”
ANSWER: mitochondria (accept mitochondrion)




                                                   Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                           Round 1


(Tossup 19) In quantum mechanics, the Hamiltonian operator describes the total sum of this property
for a system. The first law of thermodynamics holds that this property is always conserved. This property
is measured in Joules and is defined as the ability for a system to do work. Coming in “kinetic” and
“potential” forms is, for the point, what property that gives a material the ability to move?
ANSWER: energy (accept kinetic energy; accept potential energy)


(Tossup 20) Dijkstra’s algorithm is used on weighted examples of these objects. If one of these
mathematical objects has no cycles of odd length, it is called bipartite and can be colored with two colors.
If a connected one of these objects has no cycles it is called a tree. For the point, name these objects made
up of vertices connected by edges.
ANSWER: graphs


(Tossup 21) Gaps in this structure are called plasmodesmata. Bacteria have peptidoglycan in this
structure, and in fungi it is composed of chitin. Cellulose is the main protein that makes up this tough
structure in plants which gives them their rigidity. For the point, name this structure that surrounds the
cell membrane that is not found in animal cells.
ANSWER: cell wall (do not accept or prompt on cell membrane)


(Tossup 22) In infants, this structure contains soft fontanelles that allow the calvaria to expand. The
sagittal suture bisects this structure, which contains a hole at its base called the foramen magnum. This
structure’s zygomatic bone articulates with the maxilla to form the floor of the orbital cavity. One division
of the trigeminal nerve in this structure runs along the mandible, or jawbone. For the point, name this
bony structure that houses the brain.
ANSWER: skull (accept cranium; prompt on head)


(Tossup 23) Bose-Einstein condensates only exist at points near this condition. The third law of
thermodynamics states that at this value, crystals have no entropy. This condition, the lowest on the
Rankine and Kelvin scales, cannot be reached by a physical apparatus. For the point, name this coldest
possible temperature.
ANSWER: Absolute zero (accept zero Kelvin)


(Tossup 24) This biome is the primary home of the rock ptarmigan [tar-me-gan] whose Svalbard variety
is a terrestrial bird unique to the archipelago. The treeline is the point at which this biome and the Taiga
meet. This biome’s vegetation includes lichen and moss, but not trees due to high elevation, permafrost
subsoil, and low temperatures. For the point, name this cold biome that makes up most of the Arctic
circle.
ANSWER: tundra




                                                   Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 1


(Tossup 25) Pepsinogen in this organ becomes active after hydrochloric acid is secreted into this organ.
Ulcers in this organ can be caused by infections of Helicobacter Pylori. The chyme produced in this organ
is fed to the duodenum of the small intestine. For the point, name this organ between the esophagus and
the small intestine that secretes gastric acid to digest food.
ANSWER: stomach


(Tossup 26) These features form cryptodomes and leave behind calderas when they collapse. Varieties of
a substance produced by these features include pahoehoe [pa-ho-ay-ho-ay], aa, and pillow. These features
come in shield, cone, and composite varieties. More than 75% of the world’s active ones are in the Ring
of Fire. Vesuvius and Mount St. Helens are examples of, for the point, what openings in the earth’s crust
that expel lava?
ANSWER: volcanoes


(Tossup 27) This element bonds to oxygen and sodium in bleach. Its diatomic form is a yellow gas,
which was the first gas used in chemical warfare in World War I. This halogen is below fluorine and above
bromine on the periodic table. It is often used to clean swimming pools and its ion is bound to sodium in
table salt. For the point, name this element with atomic number 17 and symbol Cl.
ANSWER: chlorine (accept Cl before it is read)


(Tossup 28) These events can be described by elastic-rebound theory, and they are common at strike-slip
faults. These disasters originate at a point known as their epicenter, and when that point is under the sea,
these events can cause tsunamis. The Richter scale measures, for the point, what natural disasters that
cause the ground to shake?
ANSWER: earthquakes (accept tremors; accept temblor)


(Tossup 29) This element is produced via the fusion of oxygen and helium in the alpha process. Out of
all elements with a complete p shell, this element is the lightest. Along with another element, this element
forms a laser that produces light at 633 nanometers. This element is frequently used in signs due to its
ability to produce a characteristic, bright light. For the point, name this second lightest noble gas with
symbol Ne.
ANSWER: neon (accept Ne before it is read)


(Tossup 30) These pathogens are classified using the Baltimore classification scheme, and their name
comes from the Latin for “poison.” These infectious agents are known as phages when they infect bacteria,
and it is still debated whether they can be classified as living organisms. For the point, name these
infectious agents that include Hepatitis and Ebola which overtake a host’s molecular machinery to create
copies of their own genome.
ANSWER: viruses (accept virions; accept viral particles; prompt on bacteriophage; prompt on phage)




                                                  Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                        Round 1


Replacements

(Tossup 31) The Cassini probe was sent to study this planet and its storms are often called Great
White Spots. Its moons include Enceladus, Iapetus, and one that has liquid on its surface and a nitrogen
atmosphere. That moon named Titan orbits this second largest gas giant. For the point, name this sixth
planet from the sun that is surrounded by a large icy ring system.
ANSWER: Saturn

(Tossup 32) 60 atoms of this element make up the soccer ball-shaped buckyballs. Because this element
can make up to four bonds, it can form a variety of complex structures. When this element is subjected
to high pressures it can form diamonds. For the point, name this element with symbol C, the basis of life.
ANSWER: carbon (accept C before it is read)




                                                 Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 2



                                            Round 2
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Components of this structure can be moved around more readily with flippases and
scrambelases. An imbalance of phosphatidyl [phos - fa - tiddle] serine in this structure is an “eat me”
signal for macrophages. S.J Singer and G.L Nicolson described this structure as a “two-dimensional liquid”
that allows lipid rafts and receptors to move around; that is the fluid mosaic model of this structure. For
the point, name this portion of the cell made up of proteins embedded in a phospholipid bilayer, which
functions to separate the cell from its environment.
ANSWER: cell membrane (accept plasma membrane; prompt on membrane; prompt on phospholipid
bilayer)

(Tossup 2) The Japanese theorem deals with triangulated versions of these objects. Regular types of
these objects have apothems whose length can be modeled using the radius of a circle inscribed in one of
these objects. The interior angles of a simple one of these mathematical objects add up to the product of
n minus 2 and 180, where n is the number of sides of one of these objects. The faces of a polyhedron are
made up of, for the point, what two-dimensional shapes with straight line edges?
ANSWER: polygons


(Tossup 3) At the interior of many of these structures is a craton, while the edges consist of terranes
that are more easily transferred between these structures. As one of these named Farallon has largely
disappeared, its remnants include a smaller one of these named Juan de Fuca. The East African Rift lies
at a boundary between these two places which is diverging, unlike the subduction occurring at the Andes.
For the point, name these mobile sections of the lithosphere whose movements cause earthquakes and
volcanic activity.
ANSWER: tectonic plates (prompt on plates; prompt on continents)


(Tossup 4) In 2017, a Harvard University project proposed attaching Stratocruiser modules to these
objects in order to spray sulfates into the atmosphere. Leon Teisserenc de Bort used observations from
these objects to discover the stratosphere. In 1873, the Montgolfier brothers were the first to pilot one of
these objects, which they constructed from taffeta cloth. For the point, in 1824, Michael Faraday invented
a rubber version of what objects that use helium or hot air to float?
ANSWER: balloons


(Tossup 5) After observations of stars in this object, Walter Baade [VAL-ter BAH-deh] formulated the
idea that stars could be grouped based on their metallicity. The Triangulum galaxy’s largest neighbor is
this object which was discovered to contain Cepheid variables by Edwin Hubble, partially resolving the
Shapley-Curtis debate. This object is number thirty-one in the Messier catalog and is expected to collide
with the Milky Way in 2.5 billion years. For the point, name this spiral galaxy, the closest to the Milky
Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda galaxy (prompt on M31)



                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 2


(Tossup 6) Increases in this quantity were suggested by the H-theorem, but challenged by Josef
Loschmidt. Clausius coined the name of this quantity and defined it as “transformational content.”
Ludwig Boltzmann’s tombstone is inscribed with a definition of this quantity; that definition sets this
quantity as Boltzmann’s constant times the natural log of the microstates. This quantity, symbolized S, is
always increasing due to the second law of thermodynamics. For the point, name this measure of disorder
in the universe.
ANSWER: entropy


(Tossup 7) Electrons diffract around this group of elements in the Ramsauer-Townsend effect. Neil
Bartlett created a hexafluoroplatinate compound made with an element from this group. The only
currently living person with an element named after him is Yuri Oganessian, who helped synthesize a
member of this group named oganesson. For the point, name this group of elements, such as radon and
xenon, that are on the far right of the periodic table and are named for being relatively inert.
ANSWER: noble gases (accept group 18)


(Tossup 8) A “Blue Norther” is one of these phenomena, common in places like Texas, caused by the lack
of a boundary that could stop the incursion of polar air. These fronts are the fastest-moving, and they
become occluded if they catch up to another type of front. These fronts form where warmer air is lifted by
the incursion of denser air, which can cause rain or storms if the lifted air is moist enough. For the point,
name this type of weather front often symbolized by a line of blue triangles.
ANSWER: cold fronts (prompt on “fronts” until mentioned)


(Tossup 9) Kurt Vonnegut’s brother Bernard received a patent for this process in 1975, which may have
inspired elements of the novel Cat’s Cradle. “Make mud, not war” was the slogan for Operation Popeye,
which enacted this process over Vietnam. Silver iodide is the most common chemical used during this
process, though dry ice and salt can also be effective nuclei. For the point, name this controversial process
in which small particles are dropped into the sky to stimulate condensation.
ANSWER: cloud seeding


(Tossup 10) Members of this cultural group underwent enkoimesis when they sought a healing sleep. This
group’s practice of “pharmakeia” was regarded as sorcery. One scientist from this culture was the first to
propose the four humors theory. A serpent wrapped around a pole is known as the Rod of Asclepius, after
a legendary healer from this cultural group who was the father of Hygeia and Panacea. For the point, an
oath to abstain from all harm is named for a member of what ancient culture, Hippocrates?
ANSWER: ancient Greeks (accept ancient Greece)


(Tossup 11) One form of this substance contains colostrum, which has many immune benefits. A1 and
A2 are variants of a protein found in this substance that differ only by the substitution of one amino acid,
but which may lead to differences in digestion. A mutation possibly related to differences in Vitamin D
exposure has led to lactase persistence, enabling the consumption of this substance by many adults. The
mammary glands produce, for the point, what substance that provides nutrition to young mammals?
ANSWER: milk


                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 2


(Tossup 12) Duralumin is one of these substances which hardens with age. Based on the method
of formation, these substances can be classified as interstitial or substitutional. A valuable, naturally
occurring one of these is electrum, while a low-temperature, fusible one is solder. These substances are
called amalgams when they include mercury, and one containing mostly tin is called pewter. For the point,
identify this type of substance such as brass, bronze, or stainless steel, a mixture of two or more metals.
ANSWER: alloys


(Tossup 13) A paper describing the nucleosynthesis occurring after this event was amusingly credited to
scientists Alpher, Bethe [BAY-tuh], and Gamow. The Planck time describes the boundary around this
event. Fred Hoyle coined the name for this event even though he supported the steady-state model over
it. Alan Guth developed the theory of inflation that followed this event to help explain why the universe
is so isotropic. For the point, name this event that occurred 13.7 billion years ago, widely believed to have
started the universe.
ANSWER: the Big Bang


(Tossup 14) The Porro variety of this instrument uses four reflecting surfaces. Spectrometers take
advantage of this instrument and diffraction gratings when getting spectral signatures of atoms. After
passing through the objective lens, light is directed through this instrument before reaching the eyepiece
in binoculars. Isaac Newton used this instrument to develop his theory of color. For the point, name this
simple optical device, commonly made out of glass, that breaks up white light into its colored components.
ANSWER: prism (accept specific prisms like optical prism; glass prism; triangular prism; plastic
prism; dispersive prism)


(Tossup 15) This intrusive rock is equivalent to the extrusive rhyolite. Dykes of aplite can often be seen
streaking this rock, which may have formed as this rock cooled from the same mineral composition. That
composition for this rock is between 20 and 60 percent quartz and primarily alkali feldspar, per the QAPF
diagram. Because this rock often contains trace uranium, basements built into it must be tested often for
radon. For the point, name this igneous rock, the most common continental rock, often used for decorative
countertops.
ANSWER: granite


(Tossup 16) A book often nicknamed “K&R” contains this single letter in its official title. A programming
language similar to Java is named after this letter followed by the musical sharp symbol. The binary
number 1100 is represented using this letter in hexadecimal notation. The most common type of style
sheet language used online is abbreviated with this letter coming before “SS.” For the point, two plus
signs follow what letter in the name of a common programming language?
ANSWER: C




                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                       Round 2


(Tossup 17) 4 Vesta is the only one of these objects visible to the naked eye. These objects can be
classified as C-type, M-type, and S-type, based on observations of their mineral composition. They were
named by William Herschel for their apparent resemblance to stars. These objects are thought to be
the remnants of planetesimals formed in the early solar system that lacked enough mass to become true
planets. For the point, name these objects, some of which lie in a namesake “belt” between Mars and
Jupiter.
ANSWER: asteroids (accept planetesimals until “William”)


(Tossup 18) The rate of this process in C. elegans is regulated by DAF-2. Turritopsis dohrnii is known
for its ability to reverse this process. A disease that causes this process to accelerate is due to a point
mutation in Lamin A and is known as Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. This process is associated with the
Hayflick limit, which puts a limit on the number of times a cell can divide due to telomere shortening. As
this process occurs, the number of mutations accumulate until mortality. For the point, name this process
of growing old.
ANSWER: aging (or senescence)


(Tossup 19) A coefficient of this force is plotted against the bearing number on a Stribeck curve. For a
circular pipe, the Reynolds number and relative roughness are plotted on a Moody diagram along with
a factor of this force named for Darcy. This force is independent of the area of contact according to
Amonton’s second law of it. Under static conditions, the magnitude of this force is equal to the normal
force times this force’s static coefficient. A falling object experiences drag, one type of this force. For the
point, name this force that resists changes in motion.
ANSWER: friction


(Tossup 20) The first of these events was organized after Senator Gaylord Nelson observed the damage
caused by the Santa Barbara Oil Spill. The first March for Science was organized to coincide with the
date of this event, and following the one in 2016, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change was signed.
The EPA, Clean Water Act, and Endangered Species Act are seen as responses to, for the point, what
worldwide event promoting environmentalism that was first celebrated on April 22, 1970?
ANSWER: Earth Day


(Tossup 21) A modular steel version of one of these structures was created by Donald Bailey and was
often used during wartime. Counterweights help to open and close the bascule version of these structures.
Abutments and piers in these structures help to balance compression and tension as gravity and load act
on their spans. Arches help to support one type of, for the point, what structures that may also come
in cantilevered, cable-stayed, and suspension varieties, designed to cross an obstacle such as a river or
roadway?
ANSWER: bridges




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 2


(Tossup 22) Every other one of these numbers is also a centered octagonal number, and those that end
in the same digits as their generators are called automorphic numbers. Lagrange proved that all natural
numbers can be stated as the sum of four of these numbers. Two triangular numbers sum to a number
of this kind, while the difference between successive examples of these numbers generates the sequence
of odd numbers. For the point, name this kind of number such as 4, 16 or 25, generated from integers
multiplied with themselves.
ANSWER: perfect squares (or square numbers)


(Tossup 23) Frederick Soddy suggested the existence of this classification of elements to explain the
difficulty in placing them in the periodic table. Replacing an element with an atom with this classification
slows down the rate of a reaction in a kinetic effect named for this classification. Deuterium and tritium
have this classification with respect to hydrogen. The existence of elements with this classification allows
for carbon-dating. For the point, name these variants of an element which contain more neutrons but the
same number of protons.
ANSWER: isotopes (accept nuclide)


(Tossup 24) A series of pouches named for this scientist preserved nerve supply unlike the Heidenhain
pouches of his mentor. As the founder and first chair of physiology at the Institute of Experimental
Medicine, this scientist developed a theory to explain “psychic secretions” he noticed when he approached
his subjects, who believed they were about to be fed. For the point, name this Russian scientist whose
work on classical conditioning involved training dogs to salivate at the sound of a bell.
ANSWER: Ivan Petrovich Pavlov


(Tossup 25) Along with acid rain, the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study examined this process’s effect
on watersheds. Jared Diamond blames this process for the collapse of the Easter Island society. On
satellite images, the Dominican Republic-Haiti border is easily seen because of this process, also done to
expand palm oil plantations, which threatens Indonesia’s orangutans. A consequence of slash-and-burn
agriculture, this process destroys a soccer field-sized patch every minute in Brazil. For this point, name
this process in which trees are cleared from large areas of land.
ANSWER: deforestation (accept logging or any answer describing the removal of trees)


(Tossup 26) Chyme is an acidic material produced during this process whose pH is neutralized after the
release of the CCK hormone in the duodenum. A crop is a specialized organ used for this process in some
birds and insects, primarily for storage. Bile from the liver and lipase from the pancreas help to break
down fats during this process, while pepsin breaks down proteins into amino acids. For the point, name
this process of obtaining nutrients from food via organs like the esophagus and stomach.
ANSWER: digestion (accept word forms)




                                                  Page 5
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 2


(Tossup 27) Kurt Gödel’s [gur-dull’s] solution to equations governing this theory curiously exhibits
rotation and twisting worldlines. Arthur Eddington tested this theory in 1919 by taking measurements
from a solar eclipse. LIGO has confirmed the existence of waves predicted by this theory. For the point,
name this theory that describes gravity as spacetime curvature, developed by Einstein after considering a
more special case of the same concept with electromagnetism.
ANSWER: General Theory of Relativity (accept GR; prompt on “Relativity”; do not accept or prompt
on “Special Relativity”)


(Tossup 28) When too much pressure is created by the aqueous humor found inside this organ, it can lead
to glaucoma. When this organ’s shape becomes over-elongated, a person may be diagnosed with myopia.
A stage of sleep is named for the rapid movement of this body part. This structure’s lens focuses light on
the fovea which activates rods and cones in the retina. Parts of this structure include the iris and pupil.
For the point, name this part of the body that is responsible for vision.
ANSWER: the eyes


(Tossup 29) A function described by this adjective obeys the stipulation that -f(x) [negative f of x] is
equal to f(-x) [f of negative x] for all x in the domain, or equivalently, functions described by this word
have rotational symmetry about the origin. It is an unsolved problem whether there are any integers of
this type that are perfect numbers. In its plural form, this word describes the ratio of the probabilities of
an event happening and not happening. For the point, give this word that describes numbers of the form
2n + 1, which are the opposite of even numbers.
ANSWER: odd (accept odds)


(Tossup 30) When this quantity equals one over the square root of L times C, an LC circuit will exhibit
resonance. A photon’s value for this quantity is equal to energy over Planck’s constant. Woofers are
designed to produce low values of this quantity. For a given wave, this quantity is equal to one over the
period. For the point, name this quantity measured in hertz.
ANSWER: (angular) frequency


Backup

(Tossup 31) The Hubble Deep Field images show an area of the sky within this constellation. In Arab
tradition, the “three leaps of the gazelle” mark the legs of this constellation, which also contains the Owl
Nebula and Pinwheel Galaxy. In the northern hemisphere, it is the largest circumpolar constellation, and
its most recognized asterism has pointer stars that direct the observer to the North Star. For the point,
name this “Great Bear” constellation that contains the seven stars of the Big Dipper.
ANSWER: Ursa Major (accept Great Bear before it is mentioned; prompt on Big Dipper)




                                                   Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                 Round 2


(Tossup 32) This device relies on Bussard collectors to replenish its fuel, typically stored in deuterium
cartridges. Zefram Cochrane’s Phoenix was the first vessel powered by one of these devices. Ten is the
theoretical maximum output for this device, which displaces gravimetric fields and requires a dilithium
crystal matrix to mediate the matter-antimatter reaction. Invented in the year 2063, for the point, name
this Federation starship device that allows faster-than-light travel in the Star Trek universe.
ANSWER: warp drive (accept warp engine)




                                                 Page 7
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                       Round 5



                                              Round 5
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Optical beams named for this mathematician solve Helmholtz’s equation under the paraxial
approximation. This mathematician names a technique of elimination for linear equations. A law named
for this person’s scientific work implies that the magnetic flux into any enclosed space should equal the
magnetic flux leaving the enclosed space. A famous story involving this mathematician’s youth involved
him quickly summing all the integers under 100. For the point, name this German scientist who lends his
name to the normal distribution.
ANSWER: Carl Friedrich Gauss

(Tossup 2) In a form of NMR named for this particle, tetramethylsilane is used as an internal standard for
chemical shift. The Grotthuss mechanism was proposed to explain the diffusion of these particles between
water molecules. Bronsted defined acids and bases as accepting and donating one of these particles. They
can be thought of as a positively charged hydrogen atom that has had its electron stripped off. For the
point, name these particles that make up the atomic nucleus with neutrons.
ANSWER: (hydrogen) protons (or hydrogen ions or hydrogen cation; accept hydron; accept
hydrogen-1; do not accept or prompt on “hydrogen”)


(Tossup 3) The discovery of Ceres and this object were taken as proof of the since discredited Bode’s
law. This object’s satellites include Puck, Oberon, Titania, and many others named for Shakespearean
characters. Because its axis is nearly parallel to the ecliptic, this planet rotates on its side, and it was the
first planet discovered with the aid of a telescope. Found by William Herschel and named for the Greek
god of the sky, for the point, identify this seventh planet from the Sun.
ANSWER: Uranus


(Tossup 4) His last name isn’t Curie, but this scientist names a non-SI unit of radioactivity equal to
one million nuclei decay per second. This scientist is the namesake of the first element after the actinide
series, element 104. This scientist names a type of elastic scattering between charged particles caused by
the Coulomb interaction. This man supervised an experiment run by Geiger and Marsden where alpha
particles were fired at gold foil, disproving the plum-pudding model of the atom. For the point, name this
scientist who developed the model of the atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: Ernest Rutherford


(Tossup 5) This disease is classified as multibacillary [mult-ee ba-SILL-uh-ree] or paucibacillary [paw-see
ba-SILL-uh-ree]. It’s not tuberculosis, but multidrug therapy to treat this disease uses clofazimine
[cloh-faz-ee-meen], rifampicin [ruh-FAMP-uh-sin] and dapsone [dap sohn]. Only armadillos and humans
can be infected with this disease caused by a species in the Mycobacterium genus. This disease is
sometimes referred to as Hansen’s disease. For the point, name this disease that causes nerve damage and
skin lesions, a highly contagious disease that led to people being quarantined in namesake colonies.
ANSWER: leprosy (accept leper colonies; accept Hansen’s disease before mentioned)



                                                    Page 1
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                       Round 5


(Tossup 6) A wier is a type of this structure which may contain a notch allowing for some passage past it.
Those built for tailings may be partially built of the tailings themselves. These structures make pumped
storage plants possible. Increased rates of sedimentation due to these structures can be mitigated by the
use of a sluiceway that bypasses this structure. Jinping 1 is the tallest one of these structures in the world,
while Three Gorges is capable of producing the most energy. For the point, name these structures which
hold back the flow of water to create a reservoir, possibly for hydroelectric generation.
ANSWER: dams


(Tossup 7) Vinkensport is a competition among members of this class of animals in traditional Flemish
culture. The greater honeyguide is a member of this class of animals often used by humans in Africa.
Magnetoreception is thought to be responsible for the “homing” behavior of some members of this class,
which has been exploited for message delivery. Peregrines are one species in this class used for hunting.
For the point, name this class of animals, used by humans in such activities as falconry and cockfighting.
ANSWER: birds (accept Aves)


(Tossup 8) The Salar de Uyuni in Bolivia is an example of the deposition of this substance in an
endorheic basin. Atriplex is a genus of plants known for their ability to tolerate this substance, making
them halophytes. Rapid dehydration is a danger of mining this substance, as it easily flakes into the air.
The major drivers of oceanic circulation are the temperature and the concentration of this substance. For
the point, name this mineral which is present in ocean water in much higher concentrations than in fresh
water.
ANSWER: salt (accept sodium chloride or halite)


(Tossup 9) Importin and exportin proteins are responsible for shuttling cargo with NLS and NES signals
into and out of this organelle. This organelle is studded with eight-fold symmetric pore complexes that
look like mini-basketball hoops. A dense region within this organelle is the site of ribosome production.
Within this organelle, both eu- [you] and hetero- forms of chromatin exist, depending on gene expression.
For the point, name this organelle, where transcription occurs and where DNA is stored.
ANSWER: nucleus (accept nuclear membrane; do not accept or prompt on nucleolus)


(Tossup 10) All examples of the mineral stishovite found on Earth’s surface are associated with these
features. Another of these features named for Herschel gives Saturn’s moon Mimas an uncanny resemblance
to the Death Star. Among the largest of these in the Solar system are Hellas on Mars and Caloris on
Mercury, though a notable Earth example is the 560-foot deep Meteor one near Flagstaff, Arizona. For
the point, identify these rounded depressions formed by the impact of a solid object on a celestial body.
ANSWER: impact craters (accept meteorite until “Herschel”; prompt on “basin”)




                                                   Page 2
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                  Round 5


(Tossup 11) A visitor pattern is used by walkers and changers in these computer programs. The
“just-in-time” variety of these computer programs often relies on a virtual machine which can execute
bytecode. These programs begin by scanning tokens to create an intermediate representation, which is
then optimized before this program turns an input into machine-readable binary code. For the point,
name this type of computer program that translates between programming languages, such as Clang,
LLVM, or GCC.
ANSWER: compilers


(Tossup 12) A National Laboratory named for these objects in Colorado stores about 17 kilometers
worth of these objects. The official stratigraphic boundary between the Pleistocene and Holocene epochs
is defined by evidence from one of these objects from Greenland. Dating of isotopes and impurities found
within air trapped inside these objects has helped us understand ancient climates. For the point, name
these long vertical tubes which are cut as samples from the frozen landscape in places like Antarctica.
ANSWER: ice cores (prompt on cores; prompt on ice samples)


(Tossup 13) The Starling equation describes how this material becomes extravascular in the body. FFP
is a type of this material collected through apheresis, which separates and returns erythrocytes and
leukocytes back to the body. A universal donor for this material is of the AB type, a reversal of what
is expected from whole blood donation. For the point, name this yellow-colored fluid made of primarily
water, in which other components of blood are suspended.
ANSWER: blood plasma


(Tossup 14) VLBI and aperture synthesis are techniques which simulate larger versions of these devices.
The Newtonian version of these devices was the first to include a secondary mirror perpendicular to the
objective. Chester Moore Hall was the first to use an achromatic lens in one of these devices, helping to
correct for the lack of sharpness in previous versions. For the point, name these optical devices built to
see distant objects, such as the Hubble and Webb ones in space.
ANSWER: telescopes (accept radio telescopes until “Newtonian”)


(Tossup 15) This data structure is utilized to evaluate expressions when computers are using reverse
Polish notation. Forth and PostScript are languages oriented around this data structure which works in
the opposite manner to a queue. Implementations of this data structure make use of peek, pop, and push
operations. Exceeding the size of this data structure causes its namesake “overflow.” For the point, name
this last in, first out data structure that places items one on top of the other.
ANSWER: stacks




                                                 Page 3
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 5


(Tossup 16) Protecting circuits commonly connect two of these devices to ground, anti-parallel to each
other. The Esaki variety of this device was one of the first to take advantage of quantum tunneling.
Akasaki, Amano, and Nakamura won a 2014 Nobel prize for creating an efficient version of these devices
that emits blue light. Circuit diagrams depict these devices as a triangle with a line over one point. For
the point, name this circuit element that only allows current to flow in one direction, whose light-emitting
variety is abbreviated L.E.D.
ANSWER: diodes (prompt on L.E.D.; accept light-emitting diodes)


(Tossup 17) A selective type of this chemical reaction can separate the magnesium and calcium in
seawater. Qualitative analysis employs a chloride solution to detect silver ions via this reaction. The
technique of salting out uses this reaction to purify proteins. Mixing lead nitrate and potassium iodide
produces insoluble lead iodide due to this reaction. Hard water stains and stalactites result from, for the
point, what type of reaction in which two solutions combine to form a solid compound?
ANSWER: precipitation reaction (prompt on “forming a solid”; prompt on “double-replacement” or
“double-displacement” reaction)


(Tossup 18) Perimysium groups this tissue into bundles. Two Z-lines and the H-zone are part of the
basic unit of this tissue collectively referred to as a sarcomere. This tissue contains a unique organelle
responsible for storing calcium ions called the sarcoplasmic reticulum. One type of this tissue is divided
into “slow twitch” and “fast twitch” varieties. The sliding filament model explains the movement of this
tissue through interactions between actin and myosin. For the point, name this tissue that is responsible
for contraction in the heart and skeletal movement.
ANSWER: muscle tissue (accept smooth muscle; accept skeletal muscle)


(Tossup 19) Two of these regions named P1 and P2 form only in waterlogged conditions. The stonelayer
may appear at the base of one of a silica-rich one of these regions named E, marking the lowest depth
of the biomantle. Those little affected by pedogenesis are denoted by the letter C, while the one of these
denoted B often contains oxides. The topmost one of these regions may contain significant humus. For the
point, name these regions or layers in a soil profile which show different characteristics.
ANSWER: soil horizons


(Tossup 20) Degenerate matter hypothesized to exist in the center of these objects come in whimsically-
named “pasta phases” like “lasagna” and “spaghetti.” The crust of these objects can shift to cause
starquakes which result in “glitches” that increase the rotation of these objects. The mass of these objects
is bounded by the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. When these objects spin rapidly they can be
classified as a magnetar or pulsar. The smallest and densest observed star type to date is, for the point,
what stellar remnant primarily composed of just one type of particle?
ANSWER: neutron stars (prompt on “pulsar” or “magnetar” before read)




                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 5


(Tossup 21) This type of number is multiplied times the coefficient and then decreased by one in a rule for
taking the derivative. The degree of a polynomial is defined by the largest one of these numbers. Roots can
be written using fractional types of these numbers, and simplified fractions never have negative numbers
of this type. The operation named for these numbers can be thought of as repeated multiplication. For
the point, name these numbers written using superscript that define the number of times the base is
multiplied by itself.
ANSWER: exponents (accept powers)


(Tossup 22) One early published recipe for this substance included both honey and the toxic realgar.
This substance was discovered by alchemists looking for an elixir for immortality per the Taoist tradition.
A man named Iron Li is legendarily said to have used this substance inside a ceramic bottle to scare foxes,
while its original use may have been in so-called “fire arrows.” For the point, name this substance, a
mixture of charcoal, sulfur, and saltpeter discovered to be explosive by Chinese inventors around 850 AD.
ANSWER: gunpowder (accept black powder)


(Tossup 23) Lodgepole pines are one example of a species that requires this phenomenon to reproduce.
Plats known as resprouters dominate after this phenomenon, such as occurs in the California chaparral
landscape. In late 2018, President Trump incorrectly reported that Finland reduces this phenomenon
through raking. This phenomenon causes soil to become more basic, thought to be due to the ash it
creates. For the point, name this phenomenon that is used to create new farmland in the “slash and burn”
procedure.
ANSWER: forest fire (accept wildfire; prompt on burning)


(Tossup 24) The radial variant of this system is one of two possible potentials with bound and closed
orbits, according to Bertrand’s theorem. The quantum analogue of this system has energy levels h-bar
times omega apart. Each atom behaves as one of these systems in the Einstein model of a solid. The
Q-factor determines how much damping occurs in these systems. A classic example of one of these systems
is a mass attached to the end of a spring that can be described by Hooke’s law. For the point, name these
systems that experience sinusoidal, periodic motion.
ANSWER: harmonic oscillator (accept simple harmonic oscillator; accept quantum harmonic
oscillator; accept radial harmonic oscillator accept SHO; accept QHO; acceot RHO; prompt on
oscillator; prompt on spring)


(Tossup 25) An ancient one of these objects is commonly called the “T and O” after the shapes that
make it up. An icosahedron is used in Buckminster Fuller’s “Dymaxion” one of these objects. Isopleths
can be displayed on these objects, such as contour lines showing relief. Software generating these objects is
known as GIS, and creating these objects requires a choice of projection such as Gall-Peters or Mercator.
For the point, name these navigation aids constructed by people called cartographers.
ANSWER: maps




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                      Round 5


(Tossup 26) A molecule with this many carbon atoms has 1,3 diaxial strain from its flagpole hydrogens
that makes it less stable in its boat conformation than in its chair conformation. This many atoms
surround the central atom in pentagonal pyramidal and octahedral geometry. This many total electrons
are shared in the bonds of an alkyne [rhymes with fine]. Glucose contains this many carbons. This is
the number of valence electrons in a single atom of oxygen. For the point, how many carbons are in
cyclohexane?
ANSWER: six


(Tossup 27) The Nankai trough contains a large field of these compounds which Japan may exploit
for energy production. A hypothesis called this compound’s “gun” suggests a positive feedback loop for
global warming due to the melting of these compounds. Typically found on the continental shelf, these
compounds form when a product of anaerobic bacterial decay mixes with water at low temperatures and
high pressures. For the point, name these compounds which consist of CH4 trapped within cages of ice.
ANSWER: methane clathrates


(Tossup 28) Phragmosomes form prior to this process in plants. When nuclear lamina are phosphorylated,
one stage of this process allows microtubules to begin attaching themselves to kinetochores. After the
spindle checkpoint, sister chromatids are cleaved during anaphase and begin to separate into two new
nuclei during this process’s telophase. Occurring after G2 interphase is, for the point, what process of cell
division that results in two daughter cells identical to the original cell?
ANSWER: mitosis


(Tossup 29) A unique form of these materials has smectic and nematic phases. Materials in this form are
labelled with Miller indices before firing a beam of electrons at them to study their structure from the
diffraction pattern. Louis Pasteur discovered chirality while studying tartaric acid in this form. In solid
state physics, the unit cell and a geometrically repeated pattern defines the lattice of these structures. For
the point, name these regularly structured solids, whose “liquid” variant is used in LCD TVs.
ANSWER: crystals (accept crystalline solids)


(Tossup 30) Two atoms of this type share a bond in ylides [ill-ides]. SN1 reactions precede via the
production of this type of carbon atom. Adding a “common” compound that shares this characteristic
with a product already in solution will decrease solubility of a solute and usually shifts pH. In addition to
being the conjugate base to acetic acid, acetate is this type of molecule. This type of atom usually has
a plus sign or a negative sign written next to it. For the point, name this type of atom with net electric
charge.
ANSWER: ions (accept ionic or cation [cat-”eye”-on] or anion [an-”eye”-on]; accept any indication of
non-zero charge until “electric” is read)




                                                   Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                      Round 5


Backup

(Tossup 31) The removal of hydrogen from this substance is responsible for the release of oxygen during
photosynthesis. The non-polarity of lipids makes them useful for protecting against this substance, such
as by creating micelles or waxes. Respiration and uresis both release this substance from the body. The
crystal structure of this substance’s solid form allows it to float, thus protecting marine life from freezing
temperatures. For the point, name this substance necessary for life in which marine life swims.
ANSWER: water

(Tossup 32) The irregular Canis Major is the nearest galaxy that can be described by this adjective.
Many Kuiper Belt objects like Haumea and Makemake can be described by this term, thanks to a new
category created in 2006. Along with “red”, this term describes the majority of stars in the Milky Way,
and in about seven billion years the Sun will become a white star of this type. For the point, give this
term for a relatively diminutive astronomical object, the opposite of a giant.
ANSWER: dwarf (accept dwarf galaxy, dwarf planet, dwarf star, red dwarf, and white dwarf )




                                                   Page 7
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                       Round 1



                                              Round 1
Regulation

(Tossup 1) This scientist generalized the action principle of classical mechanics to suggest that a particle’s
quantum amplitude is a sum over all possible trajectories. This developer of the path integral formulation
won a Nobel Prize in physics in 1965 for his contributions to quantum electrodynamics. This scientist
represented photons with wavy lines on his namesake diagrams, which are pictorial representations of
the interactions between subatomic particles. For the point, name this American physicist known for his
educational insights while working as a professor at CalTech.
ANSWER: Richard (Philips) Feynman

(Tossup 2) Hydroxy-lysine and hydroxy-proline are key amino acids in the structure of this protein.
Vitamin C is a cofactor for the synthesis of this protein which has a glycine at every third residue, causing
it to form three left handed helices that wind up into one tensile triple helix. Mutations in the production
of this protein can cause Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, characterized by loose joints and stretchy skin. This
protein is hydrolyzed to make gelatin. For the point, name this most common protein in the human body,
found in connective tissue and cartilage.
ANSWER: collagen


(Tossup 3) Charged particles in a vacuum are intercepted by this scientist’s namesake cup. An effect
named for this scientist describes the polarization of light rays passing through a B-field. A law named for
this scientist sets the electromotor force proportional to the negative change in magnetic flux. This scientist
names a cage which screens electromagnetic radiation. This assistant to Sir Humphrey Davy names the SI
unit of capacitance. For the point, name this English scientist whose study of electromagnetism led him
to propose a namesake law of induction.
ANSWER: Michael Faraday


(Tossup 4) Manganese nodules can be found in this region and have been mined from here at great
cost. Cold seeps in this region can create brine pools, while this region is famous for its “smokers,” or
hydrothermal vents. Harry Hess showed that this region’s expansion is partially responsible for plate
tectonics, creating alternating magnetic bands in the rock here. Basalt is the most common rock making
up, for the point, what region of the Earth that lies underneath the Atlantic and Pacific?
ANSWER: ocean floor (accept oceanic crust; accept seabed; accept answers that indicate the bottom
of the ocean)


(Tossup 5) On the twelfth space mission named for this constellation, Buzz Aldrin made a five and a
half hour space walk tethered to the Agena Target Vehicle. The Eskimo and Medusa nebulas are found
within this constellation, whose symbol resembles the Roman numeral for two. The two brightest stars in
this constellation are collectively known as the Dioscuri and are associated with the myth of Castor and
Pollux. For the point, name this constellation whose name is Latin for “twins.”
ANSWER: Gemini (accept Gemini 12)



                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 1


(Tossup 6) Eosinophils, basophils, and neutrophils are named for whether or not they retain one of these
features named H&E. In one technique to create this feature, an iodine solution is added as a mordant
after adding crystal violet to see if a bacteria has a thick or thin peptidoglycan [pep-tid-oh-GLY-can]
wall; that technique was developed by Hans Christian Gram. Solvents can be used to fully remove these
features, while bleach and hydrogen peroxide can remove their color. For the point, name these blemishes
or dyes that are difficult to remove.
ANSWER: stains (accept word forms like staining or stained; prompt on dye by asking “Used for what
purpose?”)


(Tossup 7) A conjecture named for “twins” of these mathematical objects posits that there are infinitely
many of these constructs with a difference of two. The Mersenne type of these numbers are one less
than a power of two. Much digital security relies on the fact that a given positive number has a unique
factorization using only these numbers. The Sieve of Eratosthenes finds these numbers by progressively
crossing out composite numbers. For the point, name this type of number which only has two factors of
one and itself.
ANSWER: prime numbers (accept primes)


(Tossup 8) Research by Arthur Ashkin, Gérard Mourou, and Donna Strickland on these devices won
them the 2018 Nobel in Physics. In these devices, implementing Q-switching obtains higher peak power
than continuous-wave operation. Pumping into the gain medium of these devices puts a majority of the
electrons into higher energy states, a condition known as population inversion. For the point, name these
devices that produce a collimated beam of coherent light, whose practical applications include barcode
scanning.
ANSWER: laser (or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation)


(Tossup 9) This organ’s stellate cells can cause scarring upon activation, but typically store Vitamin A
droplets. The sinusoids of this organ are lined with a special type of macrophage called Kupffer cells. This
organ receives blood through the portal vein and helps with digestion by producing bile, which is stored
in the gallblader beneath this organ. For the point, name this large internal organ damaged in cirrhosis,
which can be a result of hepatitis or alcoholism.
ANSWER: the liver


(Tossup 10) Hilt’s law relates the quality of this substance to the depth at which it is found. This
substance’s bituminous form can be processed into coke, while impurities may remain in the lignite
form. This substance led to the naming of the Carboniferous period, as much of it was generated by the
decomposition of forests during that period. Miners of this substance often contracted black lung from the
inhalation of this substance’s dust. For the point, name this solid fossil fuel often burned in early steam
engines.
ANSWER: coal




                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                       Round 1


(Tossup 11) One algorithm for doing this task in Python is named after Tim Peters, who noticed that he
could be more efficient at this task by identifying existing runs. “MSD” and “LSD” are variants of the
radix algorithm for this task. The “library” method for this task is related to its insertion type, where new
data is placed between existing data. The swapping of neighboring values happens in the bubble variety
of this task. For the point, name this task of arranging data, a common basic computer science problem.
ANSWER: sorting


(Tossup 12) Ludwig Biermann’s observations of the direction of comet tails was evidence of this
phenomenon. This phenomenon ceases to be supersonic at a boundary called the termination shock but
reaches as far as the heliopause. This phenomenon is largely the cause of “space weather” and it originates
as particles accelerate enough to leave the corona. For the point, name this phenomenon, a release of
particles from the sun that causes auroras when it reacts with Earth’s ionosphere.
ANSWER: solar wind


(Tossup 13) When a copper rod is suspended in a solution of this element’s nitrate, a blue solution
of copper nitrate forms along with crystals of this element. A thin plate of this element over a copper
substrate is the starting material for a daguerreotype [da-GARE-oh-type]. When Tollens reagent is added
in presence of an aldehyde, a “mirror” of this element forms. This metal has the highest conductivity and
forms the alloy electrum with gold, which sits below this element on the periodic table. For the point,
name this precious metal with atomic symbol Ag.
ANSWER: silver (prompt on Ag)


(Tossup 14) Because of her performance at one of these events, an asteroid is named for Alexandria
Ocasio-Cortez. The most prestigious award at one of these events is named for the creator of Moore’s law.
The youngest winner at one of these sponsored by Google invented a bandage embedded with graphene
nanoparticles. The 2019 winner of the Intel competition of this type built an augmented-reality system
to improve spinal surgery. For the point, name this type of competition in which students traditionally
display their hypothesis and data on a tri-fold board.
ANSWER: science fair (accept specific examples like the Intel Science and Engineering Fair)


(Tossup 15) This faculty is impacted in the birth defects atresia and microtia, which are commonly
inherited together. This sense comes in conductive and sensorineural components. The basilar membrane
divides this sense into its components by activating the Organ of Corti’s appropriate hair cells. The
electrical signals of this sense are transmitted by the cochlea. For this sense, the incus, malleus, and stapes
provide amplification to vibrations picked up from the tympanic membrane. For the point, name this
sense perceived by the ears.
ANSWER: hearing (or auditory perception; accept reasonable equivalents like listening)




                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 1


(Tossup 16) A theorem named for this man and Euler states the connection between Mersenne primes
and perfect numbers. This man’s lemma states that a prime number that divides the product of two
integers must divide one of the integers, and this man also theorized that there are infinitely many primes.
This mathematician’s work in geometry includes a system of proof based on five postulates, such as the
parallel postulate. For the point, name this ancient Greek mathematician who wrote the Elements.
ANSWER: Euclid of Alexandria


(Tossup 17) By the Haldane effect, hemoglobin carries this molecule more readily in low presence of
oxygen. The concentrations of this molecule have been measured at Mauna Loa Observatory since 1958
and plotted on the Keeling Curve. Water and this molecule in supercritical form are one way of extracting
caffeine from coffee beans. The solid form of this molecule is dry ice. For the point, name this linear
molecule, the most significant greenhouse gas which is produced alongside water in combustion reactions.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide (accept CO2 )


(Tossup 18) These phenomena often weaken in a process called “roping out,” which is the result of
conservation of angular momentum. These phenomena are made possible by a rear-flank downdraft, as
studied by Ted Fujita [foo-JEE-tuh] in his “recycling hypothesis” for the generation of these phenomena.
Detection of these phenomena when rain-wrapped may be possible by looking for a hook echo on radar.
For the point, name this type of natural disaster, a rotating column of air that may develop from a severe
thunderstorm cell.
ANSWER: tornadoes


(Tossup 19) An operator named for reversing this operator can be used to determine doubly degenerate
energy levels with Kramer’s theorem. The reversal of this quantity could make a hypothetical “white
hole.” Arthur Eddington developed a problem referred to as the “arrow of [this quantity]” since it appears
to be one directional. The chronon is a hypothetical particle that carries this quantity, which can be
thought of as a fourth dimension paired with three spatial dimensions. For the point, name this quantity
whose SI unit is the second.
ANSWER: time (accept time-reversal; prompt on T)


(Tossup 20) Dr. Martin Pall has proposed that electromagnetic fields such as WiFi are a potential cause
of this condition. Vilayanur S. Ramachandran developed the “Broken Mirrors” theory to explain this
condition in terms of dysfunctional neurons. Along with schizophrenia, Bruno Bettelheim claimed this
condition was caused by “refrigerator mothers.” Leo Kanner’s study of this condition was later challenged
by Hans Asperger. For the point, name this neurodevelopmental disorder on a namesake spectrum.
ANSWER: autism (prompt on Asperger’s Syndrome before “Asperger”)




                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 1


(Tossup 21) CRCS can be used to reduce fine generation during this procedure, although more expensive
ceramics are often used below 8,000 feet. In softer formations, an overloading of proppants can help to
increase the conductivity of this procedure by avoiding closure. Additives such as polyacrylamide are part
of the “slickwater” used in this procedure to promote fast outflow. For the point, name this procedure
which relies on injection of fluids into rocks to create wells used to obtain fossil fuels.
ANSWER: fracking (accept hydraulic fracturing)


(Tossup 22) The solution to the Basel problem is this number squared divided by 6. The number e raised
to the power of the product of this number and i equals negative 1, according to Euler’s identity. Lambert
proved that this number was irrational and sketched a proof of its transcendence. In geometry, 360 degrees
is exactly twice this number of radians. This number is the exact ratio between the circumference and
diameter of a circle. For the point, name this number which is approximately 3.14159.
ANSWER: pi


(Tossup 23) The acceleration in one type of this device is proportional to the difference of the masses over
the sum of the masses; that version of this device is called an Atwood machine. These devices are linked
into a block and tackle system to increase mechanical advantage. Among Hero’s six simple machines
are lever, wheel and axle, inclined plane, wedge, screw, and this device. For the point, name this simple
machine which consists of a wheel around which a cable is wrapped to lift up objects.
ANSWER: pulley (prompt on Atwood machine before mentioned)


(Tossup 24) Juveniles of these animals, known as parr, are equipped with a camouflaging pattern of
stripes which they lose upon becoming smolt. These anadromous animals are known for their namesake
“run,” which is believed to be part of the reason they are a keystone species in the Pacific Northwest.
These animals are often fed carotenoids when farmed to improve the color of their flesh. For the point,
name these fish, which swim upstream to spawn, that are often used to make orange-colored sushi.
ANSWER: salmon


(Tossup 25) Oneirology is the scientific study of these phenomena. Composites known as interobjects may
appear during these phenomena. One theory proposes that these phenomena help to process and ‘clean
up’ memory. The lucid type of this phenomenon is under some active control of the person experiencing
it. The interpretation of these phenomena was a major subject of study for Sigmund Freud. For the point,
name this phenomenon in which a person experiences visions and other sensations, typically during REM
sleep.
ANSWER: dreams




                                                  Page 5
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                        Round 1


(Tossup 26) One component of this landmass is the Kaapvaal craton, and 1.7 billion years ago, what
is now this landmass was home to a naturally-occurring fission reactor. The splitting of this landmass
has already begun in its Afar Depression. In the summer of 2018, a large dust cloud originating on this
continent traveled across much of the United States, and the earliest hominid fossils have been discovered
in its Great Rift Valley. For the point, Lake Victoria and the Kalahari Desert are located on which
second-largest continent on Earth?
ANSWER: Africa (accept Vaalbara until “1.7”)


(Tossup 27) In theory, a black hole can generate an oscillating Rosetta one of these things. Using conic
sections, Carl Friedrich Gauss calculated one of these things that permitted the rediscovery of Ceres.
Venus has the least eccentric one of these, while those of Neptune and Pluto intersect. A satellite with a
period matching Earth’s rotation has a geosynchronous one of these paths. For the point, give this term
for the path a planet takes around a star.
ANSWER: orbit


(Tossup 28) Monochlamydeous plants typically lack these structures, Lying above the calyx, the corolla
is made up of these structures, and it may surround a brighter corona, such as in the Narcissus. When
these structures are indistinguishable from sepals, they are called tepals. Located above the sepals are, for
the point, what colorful and often fragrant parts of a flowering plant which attract pollinators?
ANSWER: petals


(Tossup 29) This quantity is plotted on the x-axis of a Pourbaix diagram. Proteins have neutral charge at
a value of this quantity called the isoelectric point. Lime is used to increase this quantity in soil, and buffer
solutions can be used to maintain a relatively constant value of this quantity during chemical reactions.
Phenolphthalein turns pink above 8.5 for this quantity, such as in a solution of baking soda. Calculated
as the negative log of hydrogen ion concentration, for the point, name this measure of acidity that is 7 for
pure water.
ANSWER: pH


(Tossup 30) In Shoreham, New York, this engineer designed the Wardenclyffe Tower, intended to transmit
messages across the Atlantic to England. Alfred Brown and Charles Peck started a company with this
scientist which got off the ground with a patent for a polyphase induction motor that was licensed to
George Westinghouse. This man replaced the insulator in a Ruhmkorff coil with an air gap to create his
namesake coil, known for discharging violet-colored light. For the point, name this Serbian-American
inventor and engineer, honored with the SI Unit of magnetic flux.
ANSWER: Nikola Tesla




                                                    Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                  Round 1


Backup

(Tossup 31) This layer contains most of the mass of the atmosphere, including most of its water vapor.
Hadley cells and Ferrel cells lie within this region of the atmosphere, and their tops are defined by the
inversion layer lying above this layer of the atmosphere. At the bottom of this layer is the planetary
boundary layer, where absorbed heat is radiated back into this layer, making it warmest near the bottom.
For the point, name this layer of the atmosphere in which weather takes place nearest to the Earth’s
surface.
ANSWER: troposphere

(Tossup 32) This country operated both the Buran shuttle program and Venera probes from Baikonur.
Among this nation’s most successful vehicles was the Soyuz, and its Mir station continued to operate until
2001. Pioneers from this country included Valentina Tereshkova and Laika the dog, and its pilot Yuri
Gagarin was the first person to leave Earth’s atmosphere. Launching Sputnik in 1957, for the point, name
this former country whose cosmonauts competed against Americans in the space race.
ANSWER: Soviet Union (accept USSR; prompt on Russia until “Baikonur,” which is in Kazakhstan)




                                                 Page 7
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 6



                                            Round 6
Regulation

(Tossup 1) A displacement form of this quantity was introduced by James Clerk Maxwell as a modification
to Ampere’s Law. An enclosed circulation of a non-zero amount of this quantity forms a magnetic dipole.
Electrical engineers represent the imaginary constant with j instead of i because i is already used for this
quantity. This quantity is equal to voltage over resistance, according to Ohm’s Law. For the point, name
this quantity reported in amperes, a measure of how fast charge carriers flow through a circuit.
ANSWER: current (or displacement current)

(Tossup 2) Cockcroft and Walton used one of these devices to achieve the feat that led to their 1951
Nobel Prize in Physics. Ion implanters used to dope silicon for use in electronics are a type of this device
which can cause sputtering. The D-shaped electrodes in one of these devices cause a spiraling pattern to
emerge, leading to the name cyclotron for that generation of these devices. For the point, name these
devices which may use electric fields to speed up beams of protons.
ANSWER: particle accelerators (accept particle colliders)


(Tossup 3) Francois Jacob and Jacques Monod studied this organism and discovered it produces a
permease and cleaving enzyme that help metabolism when glucose levels are low. Negative repressible
feedback mechanisms have been found in this organism’s trp [“trip”] and lac operons. This bacteria
produces a Shiga toxin associated with haemolytic uremic syndrome, in its most clinically significant
serotype O157:H7. For the point, name this rod-shaped bacteria present in the gut whose toxic outbreaks
have been linked to romaine lettuce.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli (prompt on “coli”)


(Tossup 4) This equation can be used to plot a Pourbaix [por-bay] diagram. In biology when modelling
a cell membrane, the Goldman equation replaces this equation to take into account multiple ions. This
equation features the term: negative R, T over z, F times the natural log of Q, where Q is the reaction
quotient, F is the Faraday constant, and z is the number of electrons transferred in the cell reaction. A
galvanic cell’s reduction potential is given by, for the point, what electrochemical equation named for a
German chemist?
ANSWER: Nernst equation


(Tossup 5) Firn is a substance found at the head of one of these bodies, made of compacted névé
[nay-vay]. Cirques [serks] are created by the action of these bodies, and seracs [suh-ROCKS] are formed
when two or more crevasses [kruh-VOSS-es] meet on one of these bodies. Randklufts and bergschrunds
can be found where these bodies begin to pull away from stable rocky cliffs. Moulins [“Mulans”] allow
water to enter these bodies from the top. For the point, name these bodies that contain most of Earth’s
fresh water in the form of dense, moving ice.
ANSWER: glaciers




                                                  Page 1
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 6


(Tossup 6) Two candidates for this substance are termed WIMPs and MACHOs, neither of which is
composed of baryons. A model of cosmology using a lambda parameter describes this substance as “cold.”
Vera Rubin provided evidence for this substance by showing measurements of angular motion of galaxies
did not fit predictions, suggesting some missing form of matter. For the point, name this probable form of
matter making up most of the universe, named for the fact that we cannot detect it with light.
ANSWER: dark matter (accept just dark after matter; accept cold dark matter)


(Tossup 7) In the early 20th century, only scientists from this country could detect the fictitious N-rays.
Hand and face transplants were both first carried out in this country. The HIV virus was discovered by
researchers in this country at an institute named for the developer of the first successful anthrax vaccine.
The metric system was invented during this country’s revolution, and the element gallium is named for it.
For the point, identify this country whose eminent scientists include Louis Pasteur, Henri Becquerel, and
Pierre Curie.
ANSWER: France


(Tossup 8) The “num” library in this language is used for mathematical algorithms and data statistics.
Tutorials in this language commonly make use of “spam” and “eggs” as variable names. This language,
developed by Guido van Rossum, is typically recommended for novices due to its lack of syntactic
overhang, since it delimits blocks with whitespace indentation. For the point, name this interpreter
language that is actually named after a British sketch comedy show and not a snake.
ANSWER: Python (accept NumPy [num-PIE])


(Tossup 9) Pannus, or scud clouds, may appear underneath this type of cloud. Arcus clouds serve as
accessories to this type of cloud. These clouds form as convection continues to expand a congestus cloud,
where wind shear near the tropopause can give them their characteristic anvil-like tops. The maximum
parcel level is reached in some of these types of clouds, creating a dome-like “overshooting top.” For the
point, name these large and menacing clouds that may develop into thunderstorms.
ANSWER: cumulonimbus clouds


(Tossup 10) The only known car in space is this color and is a Tesla launched on SpaceX’s Falcon Heavy
in 2018. Stars which have depleted hydrogen in their cores but are still fusing it in a surrounding shell
are known as this color of giants. An increase in wavelength as objects move further from the observer is
known as this color shift. A high-pressure storm in the atmosphere of Jupiter is named for being a “Great
Spot” of this color. For the point, name this color usually associated with the planet Mars.
ANSWER: red


(Tossup 11) Pickwickian syndrome is an obesity-associated disorder of this body system, which can
also suffer a namesake distress syndrome when surfactant is lacking. This body system’s tidal volume is
normally about 7 milliliters per kilogram of body weight, but that number may be reduced by emphysema.
In most aquatic animals, gills are the major organs of this system. Alveoli are the functional units of, for
the point, which body system that exchanges carbon dioxide for oxygen in the lungs?
ANSWER: respiratory system


                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                       Round 6


(Tossup 12) To directly detect the gravitational form of this phenomenon, the Hafele-Keating experiment
team flew in commercial airliners while measuring cesium beams. The anomalous half-life of muons was
explained by this phenomenon. The Lorentz transformation implies relativity of simultaneity, length
contraction and this phenomenon. If Rita travels at 99.9% the speed of light to Alpha-Centauri and
back, her twin Anna would be older than her as a result of this phenomenon. For the point, name this
consequence of special relativity where time slows down.
ANSWER: time dilation (prompt on “special relativity” until mentioned)


(Tossup 13) Fyodorov proved that a type of this structure with translational symmetry has only 17
possible different patterns called wallpaper groups. The Conway criterion describes whether a certain
prototile can create one of these structures. Rep-tiles can be used to create a pinwheel, which is an
aperiodic type of this structure. Only three shapes can create the regular type of these structures:
triangles, squares, and hexagons. For the point, name these structures, sometimes called tilings, which
cover the surface of a plane with a pattern of repeated smaller shapes.
ANSWER: tessellations (accept tilings until “prototile”)


(Tossup 14) In 1927, this journal published the result of the Davisson-Germer experiment which supported
wave-particle duality. Its annual list of 10 “people who mattered” in science recently included Scott Pruitt.
This British journal famously published Watson and Crick’s paper on the structure of DNA without
sending it out for peer review. For the point, name this prestigious scientific publication currently owned
by Springer whose single word name comes from a quote by William Wordsworth.
ANSWER: Nature


(Tossup 15) Soft-bodied organisms from this geological period are preserved in the Chengjiang biota.
Stephen Jay Gould’s book Wonderful Life describes unusual fossils from this period such as the five-eyed
Opabinia and the dominant predator Anomalocaris. Pikaia, the possible ancestor of all vertebrates, first
appears in rocks of this period’s Burgess Shale. Famous for its trilobites, for the point, name this geological
period, the first in the Paleozoic era, that saw a namesake “explosion” in animal diversity.
ANSWER: Cambrian period


(Tossup 16) The development of this structure is divided into placode, bud, cap, and bell stages.
Gutta-percha is an inert polymer commonly used to fill the base of these structures after pulp infection.
The roots of these structures are covered with cementum, primarily made up of hydroxyapatite and
collagen. These structures are embedded within the maxilla and mandible. For the point, name these
calcium-rich structures such as the bicuspid and molar, responsible for breaking up food.
ANSWER: (human) teeth (or tooth)




                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 6


(Tossup 17) Francis Wenham’s invention of this device allowed him to see that long and narrow objects
performed better. The Reynolds number was discovered in one of these devices by experiments on a scale
model. Pressure-sensitive paint is sometimes used during testing in these devices and can help users of
these devices perform a wake survey to determine drag. For the point, name these devices used to study
the aerodynamics of objects by placing them in a tube with flowing air.
ANSWER: wind tunnels


(Tossup 18) This adjective names an isotope effect used to study reaction mechanisms in organic
chemistry. Another branch of chemistry named with this term uses first and second order rate laws to
classify reactions. A theory of gases described by this adjective assumes particles have negligible size,
completely elastic collisions, and constant motion. For the point, name this adjective that labels a type of
energy proportional to the temperature of a gas, in contrast to the potential energy.
ANSWER: kinetics


(Tossup 19) Bubble chambers most frequently make use of this element’s liquid form. Schrodinger was
able to explain the Stark effect components of this element by using his namesake equation to solve it
as a quantum system. To explain the Paschen, Balmer, and Lyman series that can be viewed from this
element’s emission spectra, Rydberg developed his namesake formula. Rydberg’s formula was based on a
planetary model developed by Niels Bohr of this element. For the point, name this element, described in
quantum mechanics as a single proton orbited by a single electron.
ANSWER: hydrogen (accept liquid hydrogen or H2; accept hydrogen gas)


(Tossup 20) These objects decay by emitting Hawking radiation, and active galactic nuclei are powered
by accretion of gas into these objects. An image of one of these objects at the center of M87 was taken
by a global array of radio telescopes known as the Event Horizon Telescope in 2019. Their Schwarzschild
radius is where the escape velocity equals the speed of light. For the point, name these astronomical
objects that are so massive that not even light can escape their gravitational pull.
ANSWER: black holes


(Tossup 21) Natick Labs is a part of this organization which recently developed the OCP as a replacement
for UCP and MultiCam. The eCybermission competition is run by this organization as part of their
STEM outreach program. The Corps of Engineers is a branch of this organization known for their work
in flood control. This organization commissioned the Apache helicopter and the Humvee, both of which
today often feature its single-star logo. For the point, name this military organization which trains its
cadets at West Point.
ANSWER: United States Army (prompt on just “Army”)




                                                  Page 4
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 6


(Tossup 22) To measure the contribution of time dilation to this effect observed in light, Ives and Stillwell
set up an experiment using canal-ray tubes. In general relativity, this effect explains a cosmological effect
described by Hubble’s law. This effect, named for a Austrian physicist, was first hypothesized viewing
binary stars and the color they emit. For the point, name this effect where an observer records a different
frequency because the emitter is moving, best exemplified by a car driving past a stationary pedestrian.
ANSWER: Doppler effect (accept Doppler shift; prompt on redshift or blueshift)


(Tossup 23) Proteins are taken out of one of these materials and put onto a nitrocellulose membrane
during a Western blot. Sodium dodecyl [do-dek-al] sulfate is commonly used in one of these materials to
isolate proteins. Polyacrylamide, silica, and agarose are commonly used in these materials. These colloids
are typically liquids dispersed in a solid medium. Larger macromolecules takes longer to run through these
materials than smaller macromolecules. For the point, name these materials used in an electrophoresis
technique that separates DNA.
ANSWER: gels


(Tossup 24) In one form of this technique, a reagent containing alcohol, a base, sulfur dioxide and iodine
is used to determine water concentration; that form of this technique is named for Karl Fischer. Iodine
is treated with a starch to form iodide in one redox variant of this technique. Diprotic acids have two
inflection points on a namesake curve in the acid-base variety of this technique. Indicators used in this
technique include methyl orange and phenolphthalein [fee - nul - thay - leen]. For the point, name this
technique of determining an unknown concentration from a known one.
ANSWER: titration (accept titrimetry; accept volumetric analysis)


(Tossup 25) Hiram Moore’s 1834 version of this machine needed to be pulled by an animal team, and a
later development saw the use of a steam engine powered by burning the straw leftover by the use of this
machine. Such straw was often pulverized by the rotary version of these devices, such as the Axial Flow
model from International Harvester. The grain platform can be changed to a more specialized header in
these machines to cut crops such as wheat and corn. For the point, name this agricultural machine that
winnows, threshes, and reaps, all in one pass through a field.
ANSWER: combine harvester


(Tossup 26) These statements were refined by the measurements of Tycho Brahe [tike-oh bra-hee]. The
second of these statements can be derived by conservation of angular momentum. The third of these
statements, published ten years later, sets the square of the orbital period directly proportional to the the
cube of the semi-major axis. The first of these laws states that all planets move around in ellipses with
the sun as one focus. For the point, name these laws of planetary motion put forward by a contemporary
of Copernicus.
ANSWER: Kepler’s three laws of planetary motion (accept Kepler after “laws” is read; prompt on
“laws of planetary motion” by asking “As stated by whom?”)




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 6


(Tossup 27) A form of this quantity due to electromagnetic radiation can be calculated by dividing
the time-averaged Poynting vector by the speed of light. This quantity is equalized throughout an
incompressible fluid by Pascal’s principle. This quantity remains constant in an isobaric process. This
quantity is proportional to temperature according to Gay-Lussac’s law, and proportional to volume
according to Boyle’s law. For the point, name this quantity, a measure of force per area, typically reported
in torr or pascals.
ANSWER: pressure (accept radiation pressure)


(Tossup 28) This scientist correctly predicted the landing site of the Treysa meteorite. Together with
his father-in-law Wladimir Köppen, he wrote The Climates of the Geological Past, published in 1924.
Six years later, this scientist died on an expedition to establish meteorological monitoring stations in
Greenland. His best known contribution to science was published in his The Origins of Continents and
Oceans. For the point, name this German scientist who proposed the theory of continental drift.
ANSWER: Alfred Lothar Wegener [“vague”-ner]


(Tossup 29) MES, ADA, and Bicine are three examples of these systems that meet Norman Good’s
selection criteria. Carbonic acid in the blood serves as one of these systems. The pH of these systems can
be calculated with the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. These systems are commonly made by mixing a
weak acid and conjugate base. They typically have a pKa within the range of 6 to 8. For the point, name
these compounds that resist changes in pH.
ANSWER: buffers (or buffer solutions; or buffer agents; buffer systems)


(Tossup 30) For two coprime positive integers “a” and “n,” “a” raised to the totient function of “n”
is related to 1 times this operation on “n” according to Euler’s totient theorem. Similarly, an integer
“a” raised to some prime “p” is related to “a” with respect to this operation on “p” by Fermat’s little
theorem. This operation is the subject of the Chinese remainder theorem. The system of arithmetic based
on this operation uses congruence relations to compare integers. For the point, name this operation, which
“wraps around” and finds the remainder after division of one number by another.
ANSWER: modulus (accept modular arithmetic; accept modulo operation; prompt on mod; prompt
on remainder)


Backup

(Tossup 31) An estuary may form when one of these things meets a body of salt water. Biomes near these
things are part of the riparian zone, and these things are the origin of oxbow lakes. The triangular-shaped
mouths of some of these things are called deltas. Alluvial aquifers typically form next to these things and
are built when these things deposit gravel and sand near their banks. For the point, name these moving
courses of freshwater, such as the Mississippi and the Nile.
ANSWER: rivers (accept synonyms such as streams or creeks)




                                                  Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                               Round 6


(Tossup 32) The flux of this quantity is related to conductivity by Fourier’s Law. The fluctuation-
dissipation theorem explains why Johnson-Nyquist noise is related to generation of this quantity in
resistors. This quantity remains zero in an adiabatic process. In thermodynamics, this quantity is
symbolized Q and has units of joules. This quantity is commonly transferred via conduction, convection,
or radiation. For the point, name this quantity, the amount of energy transferred along a temperature
gradient.
ANSWER: heat (accept resistive heating or Joule heating; do not accept or prompt on “temperature”)




                                                Page 7
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 4



                                             Round 4
Regulation

(Tossup 1) In the process of making one type of this food, Proprionibacterium freudenreichii is used to
generate carbon dioxide. An enzyme called rennet is used in the production of this food, though rennet’s
derivation from ruminant stomachs is troubling for many vegetarians. Molds may be purposefully added
to some varieties of this food for flavor and ripening. The primary component of this food is the protein
casein, which coagulates and separates from the liquid whey in the presence of lactic acid. For the point,
name this food made from the curds of milk.
ANSWER: cheese (accept Swiss cheese before “molds”)

(Tossup 2) Terry Welch improved on one method of this process by taking advantage of high-usage
patterns organized around a translation table or extended dictionary. This process is the subject of four
algorithms developed by Abraham Lempel and Jacob Ziv. Huffman coding is one method of performing
the lossless variant of this process. The extensions .rar [dot “rawr”] and .zip [dot zip] are used for files
that have undergone this process. For the point, name this process of decreasing the amount of storage
space needed for a file.
ANSWER: compression (accept lossless compression; prompt on LZW; prompt on Lempel-Ziv-Welch)


(Tossup 3) This quantity lowers the surface barrier in transistors, increasing the rate of thermionic
emission. The Stark effect describes how spectral lines split when this quantity is non-zero. The cross
product of this quantity with the H-field gives the Poynting vector. Maxwell replaced the e-m-f in
Faraday’s law with the curl of this quantity. For a single static point charge, the force over charge gives
this quantity. This field varies perpendicular to magnetic field. For the point, name this field that applies
a force to a charged particle, symbolized E.
ANSWER: (external) electric field (prompt on “E-field”; prompt on “E”)


(Tossup 4) Palisade cells and mesophyll cells are part of these structures. Monocots and dicots are
named due to their embryos having differing numbers of cotyledons, which are the proto form of these
structures. Transpiration occurs through the stomata of these structures, which are attached to the rest
of the organism by a petiole. The fronds of ferns are examples of these structures, some of which change
color in the autumn on deciduous trees. For the point, name these green plant organs, the main site of
photosynthesis.
ANSWER: leaf (accept leaves)


(Tossup 5) Simple, strong bulky bases can be formed by combining this element with n-butyl [“n” - bew
- till] or diisopropylamide [di - “iso” - pro - pill - am - ide]. Esters and carboxylic acids can be reduced
to alcohols using this element’s aluminum hydride. A salt containing this element is used as a treatment
for bipolar disorder. This element’s ions can be moved between anode and cathode making it useful in
rechargeable batteries. For the point, name this lightest alkali metal, atomic number 3, with symbol Li.
ANSWER: lithium (prompt on Li)



                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                   Round 4


(Tossup 6) This process sometimes results in the formation of bright patches called Herbig-Haro objects.
Jeans instability marks the radius where interstellar gas clouds collapse at the start of this process. Bok
globules are a common location for this process to occur. The Pillars of Creation are named for undergoing
this process, which typically also includes the formation of a proto-planetary disk. For the point, name
this process where dense regions of molecular clouds collapse and form bright objects like the Sun.
ANSWER: star formation (or anything indicating the creation of stars; accept protostar in place of star)


(Tossup 7) The GMFCS is a system for measuring the impact of this condition on motor function. This
condition’s athetoid subtype is thought to be related to hypoxia or the accumulation of bilirubin in the
basal ganglia. Botulinum toxin can be used to reduce spasms in this condition’s most common spastic
type. For the point, name this neuromuscular condition in which damage to the white or grey matter can
cause problems with movement and muscle development, named for the part of the brain usually affected.
ANSWER: cerebral palsy (accept CP)


(Tossup 8) Cloths soaked in brine separated the copper and zinc disks in an early type of this device.
Carl Gassner created the first “dry” version of this device with a solid electrolyte, while Gaston Plante’s
rechargeable design used lead and sulfuric acid. Originally composed of multiple cells joined together,
these devices were named by Benjamin Franklin for their resemblance to a group of artillery. Lithium-ion
and alkaline are the two most common types of, for the point, what electrical devices that store energy for
later use?
ANSWER: battery (accept batteries; accept voltaic pile until “Gassner”; prompt on electrochemical
cell)


(Tossup 9) Emergency shutdown of these devices is commonly referred to by the acronym SCRAM.
Graphene and water typically serve as moderators in these devices to slow down neutron flux. When
these devices produce more material than they consume, they are called “breeders.” Control rods can be
employed in these devices to shut them down in the case of runaway reactions. These devices typically use
uranium as a fuel source. For the point, name this device which produces energy through nuclear fission.
ANSWER: nuclear reactors (accept equivalents like nuclear power plant or nuclear pile; prompt on
reactor)


(Tossup 10) The Rouse number and Exner equation measure the speed and amount of this type of
substance in a flow, respectively. Consisting of compaction followed by cementation, lithification is the
process by which this type of substance becomes rock. Moraines are deposits of this type of substance by
glaciers, while beaches consist of this type of substance transported by water. For the point, name this
type of substance which consists of pieces of weathered and eroded minerals.
ANSWER: sediments




                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 4


(Tossup 11) A point on one of these objects and the normal vector can be used to define the position
of one of these objects in three-dimensional space. Stereographic projections assign points on a sphere to
points on one of these mathematical objects. While real numbers can be modeled using a line, the complex
numbers require one of these other objects with two axes. One of these objects can be defined by three
non-collinear points or by two parallel lines. For the point, name this two-dimensional surface in geometry.
ANSWER: plane


(Tossup 12) A sudden increase in the severity of this phenomenon is called a squall. Barbs with flags
are used to indicate measurements of this phenomenon on weather maps using station models. Caused
by the atmosphere’s equalization of pressure differences, this phenomenon is noticeable on beaches due
to differential heating of the land versus the water. This phenomenon’s speed can be measured using an
anemometer, and its direction using a vane. For the point, name this phenomenon of moving air.
ANSWER: wind (accept wind speed until “direction”)


(Tossup 13) Theodor Svedberg’s ‘ultra’ type of this device allowed him to study the structure of colloidal
proteins. One of these devices named for Zippe is used to purify uranium-235 gas for use in nuclear
reactors. One of these devices is used in medical laboratories to run hematocrit tests, which determine the
proportion of blood volume made of red blood cells. Human-scale versions of, for the point, what devices
are used to train astronauts by rapidly rotating to simulate strong g forces?
ANSWER: centrifuges (accept ultracentrifuge until “Zippe”)


(Tossup 14) A structure consisting of four of these things was first synthesized in the compound
chromium(II) acetate [chromium two ass-ih-tate]. The induction effect causes polarization by drawing
charge through these things. When three of these things form a triangle, they bend; that “banana”-named
variety of these things can be seen in cyclopropane. The sigma type of these is stronger than the pi type.
For the point, name these things which come in covalent and ionic types, tying up electrons between
atoms.
ANSWER: bonds (accept specific types like pi bond; sigma bond; banana bond; delta bond)


(Tossup 15) The so-called “Armada” sent to study this object included Sakigake, the first Japanese
spacecraft to leave Earth’s orbit, and the ESA’s Giotto probe. This object was the first non-planet proven
to orbit the sun. Debris from this object produces the Orionid meteor shower, and images from its last
visitation in 1986 confirmed the “dirty snowball” hypothesis. For the point, identify this comet, named
for an English astronomer, due to return to Earth’s vicinity in 2061.
ANSWER: Halley’s comet (accept 1P/Halley)




                                                  Page 3
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 4


(Tossup 16) One subject of this field of study, Mokele-mbembe, has been used to explain the lack of
hippos in Lake Bangweulu. The now defunct International Society of this field used the okapi as its
emblem. The surgeon’s photograph and Patterson film were once considered key evidence in this field,
whose researchers were embarrassed when the Mongolian death worm was proven to be a common sand
snake. For the point, name this pseudoscience which seeks to prove the existence of creatures like Bigfoot
and the Loch Ness Monster.
ANSWER: cryptozoology (prompt on zoology; prompt on folklore before “okapi”)


(Tossup 17) John Wheeler proposed that all of these particles were actually the same particle moving
backwards and forward in time in a phone call to Richard Feynman. The Davisson-Germer experiment
determined that this particle has wave-like behavior. This fermion is lighter than its tau and muon
counterparts. The Millikan oil drop experiment was the first to experimentally determine the charge of
this particle that was discovered by J.J. Thomson. For the point, name this fundamental particle whose
antiparticle is the positron.
ANSWER: electrons


(Tossup 18) The regulation of hyperactivation in these cells is done through CatSper ion channels. These
cells have their histones replaced with protamines late in development. Sertoli cells provide support to
these cells during their development. These cells contain a special organelle called the acrosome designed
to break down the zona pellucida. They are stored in the epididymis and contain a long flagellum for
motility. For the point, name these eukaryotic male gametes which fertilize egg cells.
ANSWER: spermatozoa (or sperm cells; accept spermatozoon or spermatium or spermatids)


(Tossup 19) The Laschamp event was an excursion of this phenomenon which dropped it to about 5% of
its current strength. The Van Allen belts are held in place by this phenomenon, which creates a bowshock
where it meets the solar wind. The declination of this phenomenon has varied and even reversed over
time, though it is currently titled about 11 degrees from the axis. The result of the geodynamo is, for the
point, what phenomenon generated by convection of iron in the Earth’s core?
ANSWER: geomagnetic field (accept Earth’s magnetic field; prompt on magnetic field)


(Tossup 20) Royal Crown was among the first companies to use Ermal Fraze’s design for the opening
of these containers, later supplanted by the “Sta-Tab” [stay tab] model which reduced litter from these
containers. Proteins present in beer trap oxygen, meaning that these containers may not need an internal
coating as is usually present when these containers are filled with heavily acidic and corrosive liquids such
as colas. Many sodas and other beverages are packaged in, for the point, what metal containers that are
stereotypically twelve ounces with a pop top?
ANSWER: aluminum cans (prompt on can, soda can, or beer can, by asking “Made of what material?”)




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 4


(Tossup 21) This compound and water are the products of the Sabatier reaction. The “burp” hypothesis
uses release of this compound from clathrates to explain a sudden climate shift at the end of the Paleocene
epoch. Many archaeans generate this compound in the form of marsh gas, and about 25 percent of it in
the atmosphere comes from ruminants like cows. It is thirty times more potent a greenhouse gas than
carbon dioxide. The main component of natural gas is, for the point, what simplest hydrocarbon with
formula CH4 ?
ANSWER: methane (accept CH4 before it is mentioned)


(Tossup 22) De Broglie wavelength is equal to Planck’s constant divided by this quantity. Symmetry
under translations imply the conservation of this quantity by Noether’s theorem. Newton’s second law
can be written as “force equals the rate of change of this quantity.” In metric units, this quantity is
measured as kilogram-meters per second. This quantity and kinetic energy are conserved in a perfectly
elastic collision. For the point, name this measure of how difficult it is to stop something, equal to mass
times velocity.
ANSWER: linear momentum (do not accept or prompt on angular momentum)


(Tossup 23) An apparent alignment of this phenomenon with the plane of the Solar System has been
dubbed the “Axis of Evil.” The WMAP mission detected anisotropies in this phenomenon, while the
COBE satellite measurements of it produced a near perfect black body spectrum. Arno Penzias and
Robert Wilson discovered this phenomenon by accident in 1964, and its temperature is about 2.7 kelvins.
For the point, name this faint radiation detectable throughout space, a residual effect of the Big Bang.
ANSWER: cosmic microwave background radiation (accept CMB or CMBR; do not accept or
prompt on any other order of the words)


(Tossup 24) In statistics, the phrase “of freedom” may follow this word to describe the number of data
points that may vary in a set of data. For a given polynomial, this word is used to classify the polynomial
by the highest exponent on its variables, such as quadratic or cubic. The unit with this name is equivalent
to pi over 180 radians in trigonometry. For the point, give this word which is commonly used in math for
a unit used to measure an angle, of which there are 360 in a full circle.
ANSWER: degrees


(Tossup 25) This class of compounds can be modelled as a collection of N Kuhn segments with equal
Kuhn length. Florry Huggins solution theory models the solubility of this class of compounds which can
be formed using a Ziegler-Natta catalyst. This class of compounds can be formed with a chain reaction
where the active site is regenerated after each growth step. Synthetic and plastic examples of this class of
compounds include nylon and Teflon. For the point, name these chains of repeated monomers.
ANSWER: polymers (accept polymerization; accept synthetic polymers; prompt on plastic)




                                                  Page 5
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 4


(Tossup 26) In 2019, Steve Benner announced an analogue of this molecule that doubles the storage
capacity described as “hachimoji.” Linus Pauling believed that this molecule had neutral phosphate
groups. Maurice Wilkins questionably won part of a 1962 Nobel Prize for his x-ray diffraction work on
this molecule. Rosalind Franklin’s Photo 51 of this molecule was used with Chargaff’s rules to determine
its structure by Watson and Crick. For the point, name this molecule which uses base pairs of GC and AT
to store biological information.
ANSWER: DNA (or deoxyribonucleic acid; accept hachimoji DNA; prompt on hachimoji before read)


(Tossup 27) Salt printing was invented by a man with this first name, and another man with this first
name discovered hydrogen and famously measured the density of the Earth. A prince whose name is
usually translated to this name in English led the development of the caravel sailing ship. A man with
this last name is the namesake of the SI unit for inductance. For the point, give this name, the first name
of the man who popularized the assembly line at his automobile factory.
ANSWER: Henry


(Tossup 28) This star’s companion is the closest white dwarf to Earth and was discovered by Alvin Clark
on observations of this star’s orbit made by Friedrich Bessel. The Winter Triangle is formed by Betegeuse
[“beetle juice”], Procyon [PRO-see-on] and this star. This star’s heliacal [heely-uh-cool] rising was used in
Ancient Egypt to predict the flooding of the Nile. This star has the lowest apparent magnitude at -1.46.
For the point, name this alpha star of Canis Major, the brightest star in the night sky, nicknamed the dog
star.
ANSWER: Sirius A (prompt on Canis Major Alpha; prompt on Dog Star)


(Tossup 29) This disease was targeted by the ZMapp vaccine, which relies on a serum made in fast-growing
tobacco plants. The 2018 Kivu outbreak of this disease struck the Congo last August. Controversially,
in 2014, health workers in Liberia with this disease were flown to U.S. hospitals for treatment. The first
known outbreak of this disease was a 1976 case in Zaire near a river sharing its name. For the point, name
this viral hemorrhagic disease that struck West Africa in a 2013-2016 outbreak.
ANSWER: Ebola virus disease (accept EBOV or Ebola hemorrhagic fever or EHF or EVD)


(Tossup 30) The speed of light divided by this quantity, all times Planck’s constant, provides the energy
for a quanta, according to Planck’s equation. Fraunhofer lines are dark lines seen when solar radiation
is plotted for this quantity. This quantity is measured by looking for corresponding points on the same
phase, such as two crests. This quantity is usually symbolized by the Greek letter lambda and is measured
in nanometers. For the point, name this quantity which is the inverse of frequency in electromagnetic
radiation.
ANSWER: wavelength (do not accept or prompt on frequency)




                                                   Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 4


Backup

(Tossup 31) This scientist discovered a staining technique known as the “black reaction” which stained
neurons. Even though he and Ramon y Cajal came to different conclusions on how the nervous system
worked, they were jointly awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. This scientist is the
namesake of an entity that is folded into cisternae and is responsible for dispatching protein received
from the endoplasmic reticulum. For the point, name this Italian scientist, the namesake of an organelle
apparatus.
ANSWER: Camillo Golgi (accept Golgi method or staining; accept Golgi apparatus or body)

(Tossup 32) Basement rocks are exposed in zones given this geologic name, such as the Canadian or the
Fennoscandian, which have been tectonically stable since the Precambrian. Rift zones may develop on a
type of volcano described by this adjective, which is built from a series of non-explosive eruptions of very
fluid lava that spread out, giving this type of volcano its descriptive name. For the point, give this word
that describes a geologic object that resembles a piece of protective armor.
ANSWER: shield




                                                  Page 7
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                         Round 1



                                            Round 1
Regulation

(Tossup 1) Basement rocks, shields and platform varieties of cratons make up the core of these structures.
In 1912, Alfred Wegener proposed these structures have “drifted” across ocean beds. The “super” variety
of these structures include Pangaea, which split into the modern variety of these land masses. For the
point, name these giant land masses, examples of which include Asia and North America.
ANSWER: continents (accept continetnal drift; accept continental crust; prompt on “crust”;
prompt on tectonic “plate”s; prompt on “lithosphere”; prompt on “craton” before mentioned)

(Tossup 2) This author of The Assayer legendarily said “and yet it moves” at the end of his trial for
heresy. This scientist was put under house arrest by the Inquisition for backing Copernicus’s belief of
heliocentrism. For the point, name this Italian scientist who noted two objects with different densities
would fall at the same speed and collectively names the four largest moons of Jupiter.
ANSWER: Galileo Gallilei (accept either underlined name)


(Tossup 3) In 1755, the Marquis of Pombal helped establish the study of these events with a survey
asking about damages following the one in Lisbon. In 1906, another one of these events with a Mercalli
intensity of XI [“eleven”] caused the death of over 3,000 people living in San Francisco. P and S waves
occur as a result of these events that are measured on the Richter scale. For the point, name these seismic
events caused by the shaking of the Earth’s surface.
ANSWER: earthquakes


(Tossup 4) These cells are supported by glial cells, and use messenger molecules like GABA and serotonin.
These cells can be surrounded by a myelin sheath and their dendrites connect to other cells through
synapses. These cells send electrical signals down their axons. For the point, name these cells that make
up the nervous system and relay messages in the brain.
ANSWER: neurons


(Tossup 5) These macromolecules are aided by chaperones which fold them into proper formation. They
are made up of monomers like arginine and methionine that are linked together by peptide bonds. These
macro-molecules are made from RNA in translation. For the point, name these biological molecules made
up of amino acids, which are a key nutrient along with fats and carbohydrates.
ANSWER: proteins (prompt on peptides; prompt on polypeptides; prompt on amino acids)


(Tossup 6) An increase in this quantity equals the product of ebullioscopic constant and molality. The
Leidenfrost effect occurs when a liquid encounters a region with a value above this quantity, which is the
temperature at which vapor pressure equals atmospheric pressure. For the point, name this temperature
at which liquid transitions into a vapor.
ANSWER: Boiling point



                                                  Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                          Round 1


(Tossup 7) Arthur Eddington used one of these events to prove Einstein’s prediction of gravitational
lensing. These events, which can be annular or partial, are a special form of occultation involving a body
orbiting the Earth and the body the Earth orbits. Staring at one can still damage the eye. For the point,
name these events whose solar variety sees the moon block out the sun.
ANSWER: eclipses (accept solar eclipse;prompt on answers describing occultation or occult before
mentioned; do not accept lunar eclipse)


(Tossup 8) Tuyas are volcanoes that erupt through these objects. Erosion of bedrock by these objects
occurs through plucking. Lands affected by these objects go through cycles of isostatic depression and
rebound. These objects shrink in zones of ablation and create landscape features like cirques, drumlins,
and moraines. For the point, name these giant, slow moving bodies of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers


(Tossup 9) A type of these materials called “shape-memory” returns to their original shape after being
deformed and heated. One of these materials is created in the Bessemer process, which combines pig iron
with carbon. For the point, what materials are a mixture of two or more metals and include brass, bronze
and steel?
ANSWER: alloys (accept solid solutions; prompt on metals)


(Tossup 10) This property can be reduced by the addition of common ions, and miscibility is a special
case of this property involving two liquids. Henry’s Law relates this property to the partial pressure above
a liquid. When this property is exceeded, precipitation occurs. Oil does not possess this property in water.
For the point, name this ability of a substance to dissolve in a solvent.
ANSWER: solubility (accept word forms like soluble; accept descriptions of dissolving in water;
accept miscibility before mentioned; accept mixable or mixability)


(Tossup 11) The guard cells in this structure are used to control carbon dioxide uptake. A cutical layer
over this structure prevents excess water loss through transpiration, and this structure is the site of
concentrated chloroplasts that perform photosynthesis. For the point, name this green part of a plant that
will change colors and fall off of trees in colder seasons.
ANSWER: leaf (accept leaves)


(Tossup 12) The largest “farm” that captures this form of energy is the Gansu Powerbase in China. This
energy is captured through a tower connected to a rotor which transforms the energy into rotational shaft
energy. The power of this form of energy is equal to 1/2 A times the density of air times the velocity
cubed. For the point, name this form of energy captured by turbines that spin due to air particles picking
up velocity.
ANSWER: wind energy (accept wind power)




                                                  Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                           Round 1


(Tossup 13) One protein that regulates the cell cycle called Cdk1 was first studied in S. pombe, or the
“fission” species of these microorganisms. One species of these organisms exchanges “a” and “alpha”
factors while mating, though most of them reproduce asexually through budding. The genus Saccharomyces
[sah-CAR-oh-MY-sees] includes these organisms that may release ethanol and carbon dioxide during
fermentation. For the point, name these unicellular fungi used to make bread.
ANSWER: yeasts (prompt on fungi)


(Tossup 14) These events measure a 12 or more on the Beaufort scale. These events occur after tropical
depressions and tropical storms, and are classified on the Saffir-Simpson scale. They form from numerous
thunderstorms swirling around an “eye” which, unlike a tornado, is typically quiet. For the point, name
these strong rotating storms that include Wilma, Maria, and Katrina.
ANSWER: hurricanes (accept typhoons; prompt on tropical cyclones; prompt on tropical storms;
prompt on cyclonic storms; prompt on storms)


(Tossup 15) One supplement of this vitamin is produced by irradiation of ergosterol [er-go-stare-all] in
yeast, but a more common supplement is cholecalciferol [cole–lee–cal–suh–FAIR-all]. This vitamin is active
as calcitriol [CAL-suh-TRY-all] and a deficiency in it can cause rickets. This vitamin is needed to digest
calcium and is primarily obtained through skin cells reacting with ultraviolet light. For the point, name
this fat-soluble vitamin essential for strong bones.
ANSWER: Vitamin D3


(Tossup 16) This planet’s axial tilt of over 177 degrees is the most of any planet. Ishtar Terra is the
smaller of this planet’s two highland areas, and this planet include Maxwell Montes, this planet’s highest
point. With the least eccentric orbit of any planet, one day on this planet is roughly 20 Earth days longer
than one year on this planet. For the point, identify this planet known for the runaway greenhouse effect
in its atmosphere which makes this planet the brightest planet as seen from earth.
ANSWER: Venus


(Tossup 17) On a graph of this organ’s activity, a sawtooth shape can indicate ST elevation, and a
widened QRS complex can signify a bundle branch block. In this organ, the Bundle of His transmits
signals from the AV node towards Purkinje fibers, which can be recorded using an EKG. This organ’s
mitral and tricuspid valves prevent backflow of fluid from the right and left ventricles. For the point, name
this cardiac organ that pumps blood.
ANSWER: heart


(Tossup 18) If one of these constructs is drawn through the largest angle of a right triangle, its length
equals half of the hypotenuse. These constructs are divided in a 2:1 ratio by a concurrence point called the
centroid. For the point, name this line connecting the vertex of a triangle to the midpoint of the opposite
side.
ANSWER: median




                                                   Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                        Round 1


(Tossup 19) This organ contains a fine loosely arranged layer of connective tissue called the papillary
layer. This organ of the integumentary system has a stratum basale layer which contains melanocytes
[muh-lah–no-sights]. This largest organ of the human body is divided into the epidermis, dermis, and
hypodermis tissue layers. For the point, name this fleshy organ that surrounds your body to protect it
from foreign invaders.
ANSWER: skin (prompt on dermis; prompt on epidermis)


(Tossup 20) The atomic force variety of this device was an improvement on the scanning tunneling type
of this device. The phase contrast type of these devices converts subtle phase shifts of light into more
visible brightness contrasts. Robert Hooke coined the word “cell” based on his work with this device.
Antoine van Leeuwenhoek [lay-vehn-hook] became the first person to observe bacteria by using, for the
point, what type of device which allows scientists to see extremely small objects?
ANSWER: microscopes


(Tossup 21) A famous photograph of x-ray diffraction on this molecule came out of the lab of Rosalind
Franklin. Watson and Crick discovered this molecule’s structure which is composed of bases like adenine,
guanine, thymine, and cytosine that form base pairs. For the point, name this molecule with a double
helix structure that contains the genetic code for life.
ANSWER: DNA (accept deoxyribonucleic acid)


(Tossup 22) This is the only number to have infinite factors. This number may or may not be a natural
number, depending on one’s definition. Along with 1, this number’s factorial is also equal to one. This
number cannot be divided by itself. For the point, name this number that is neither positive nor negative.
ANSWER: zero


(Tossup 23) Low amounts of this element in the blood can cause hypokalemia. This element’s isotope 40
decays to argon which can be used to date rocks. The most common form of permanganate is in a salt
with this element, and this element is below sodium on the periodic table. For the point, name this alkali
metal with atomic number 19 and atomic symbol K that is commonly associated with bananas.
ANSWER: potassium (accept K before it is read)


(Tossup 24) Two opposite points on this shape are called antipodal points, and its graph is given by
“x-squared plus y-squared plus z-squared equals r.” The surface area of this shape is equal to “4 pi r
squared.” Made up of all points that are the same distance from a given center, for the point, name this
3D analogue of a circle and the shape of a globe.
ANSWER: sphere




                                                 Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                           Round 1


(Tossup 25) This element is the densest naturally occurring liquid on earth, and 760 millimeters of
this element is equal to one atmospheric pressure unit. A barometer with this element was invented
by Evangelista Torricelli. This element has the symbol Hg. For the point, name this element known as
quicksilver, which is commonly used in thermometers.
ANSWER: mercury (accept quicksilver until it is read; accept Hg until it is read)


(Tossup 26) A dipole event in this ocean sees the the eastern portion alternate between warming and
cooling. In 2009, the Maldives government held an underwater cabinet meeting in this ocean to discuss
the impact of climate change. Warm air from this ocean in the summer generates southwest monsoon
rains over the Bay of Bengal through Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Bangladesh. For the point, name this
ocean named for a subcontinent of Asia.
ANSWER: Indian Ocean


(Tossup 27) This molecule reacts with Nickel in the Mond process. This molecule is mixed with hydrogen
gas to form synthetic gas. Concentrations of this molecule in the body can severely limit oxygen transport
by binding tightly to hemoglobin. This diatomic molecule contains a triple bond between elements with
atomic number 6 and 8 on the periodic table. For the point, name this toxic molecule with chemical
formula CO.
ANSWER: carbon monoxide (accept CO before it is read)


(Tossup 28) The conductivity of these materials can be increased by the addition of an impurity in a
process called doping. When doping increases the number of free electrons in these materials, they are
classified as “n-type”. For the point, name these materials that include gallium, arsenide, and doped-silicon
which behave like conductors in the right conditions.
ANSWER: semiconductors


(Tossup 29) This word describes a subset of T-cells that have encountered an antigen before and can
mount a fast immune response. Retrograde and anterograde are used to describe a physiological effect
where this faculty is damaged. This faculty deteriorates in Alzheimer’s disease and can be erased partially
or completely by amnesia. For the point, name this ability to recall information.
ANSWER: memory (accept descriptions of either recalling or forming memories; prompt on amnesia
before it is read by asking “What mental ability is damaged?”)


(Tossup 30) This quantity is generated for quarks and leptons by the Higgs-Boson. Gravity is an
interaction between objects which possess this quantity. The gravitational potential energy stored for
an object can be calculated by multiplying the object’s height, the gravitational field constant, and this
quantity. For the point, identify this quantity, equal to the amount of matter in an object, which is often
measured in units of grams or kilograms.
ANSWER: mass




                                                   Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                       Round 1


Replacements

(Tossup 31) One type of this group is located just before the branch in the Bowen’s reaction series. A
potassium form of this group of minerals is microcline, and labradorite is an iridicent, calcic member of
this group. Orthoclase and plagioclase classes make up this group of minerals that is defined as a six on
the Mohs hardness scale. For the point, name this group of tetrosilicate minerals that make up a majority
of the Earth’s crust.
ANSWER: feldspars (accept orhoclase; accept pagioclase before it is read prompt afterwards)

(Tossup 32) Preserved footprints found on a namesake “beach” in France first showed these organisms
could walk on land. On average, their fourth finger was ten times longer than the other digits.
Quetzalcoatlus, the largest of these organisms, had a wingspan over forty feet, and they were the first
vertebrates to evolve flight. For the point, name this group of flying reptiles that lived alongside the
dinosaurs.
ANSWER: pterosaurs (accept pterodactyls)




                                                 Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 3



                                             Round 3
Regulation

(Tossup 1) In 2019, this state’s legislature voted to make Streptomyces griseus, the source of streptomycin
antibiotic, its official microbe. Einstein tried to unify field theory at this state’s Institute for Advanced
Study. UNIX, C++, the laser, and the transistor were invented at this state’s Bell Labs. The Wizard
of Menlo Park, Thomas Edison, worked in this state, where John Nash developed his equilibrium at its
Princeton University. For the point, name this state where Willis Carrier invented air conditioning in
Newark.
ANSWER: New Jersey

(Tossup 2) SNEWS detects neutrinos as the result of one of these events in our galaxy, the last one of
which detected in 1987. Kepler names one of these events that occurred in 1604; that instance of this
event was classified as type 1a [one - “a”] occurring between a white dwarf and a red giant. One common
mechanism by which these events occur is from sudden gravitational collapse in the core of a massive star.
For the point, name these late stellar events that result in a massive explosion.
ANSWER: supernovas (or supernovae; accept specific types such as 1a, 1b, 1c, 2-P, 2-L, 2-N, or 2b
supernovae)


(Tossup 3) Andrew Taylor Still founded a branch of medicine whose name begins with this Greek prefix.
Loss of estrogen after menopause increases calcium levels in the blood in a condition beginning with this
prefix which can lead to fractures in the elderly. A cancer common in young people is a sarcoma named
with this prefix which may be found in the tibia. For the point, name this Greek prefix meaning “bone,”
which appears before “arthritis” in a condition abbreviated OA.
ANSWER: osteo- (accept osteopathic medicine or osteopathy until “prefix”)


(Tossup 4) The quality of this process is controlled with a “pioneer round” involving the cap-binding
complex. In bacteria, the Shine-Dalgarno sequence helps initiate this process. Wobble base pairing helps
explain some of the redundancy in the 20 base units used in this process. A, P, and E sites in ribosomes
are occupied by tRNAs during this process. AUG is typically the start codon for this process which
terminates when a stop codon is read. For the point, name this process of producing protein from an RNA
sequence.
ANSWER: RNA translation (prompt on answers indicating protein synthesis)


(Tossup 5) The Brinnell test can be used to determine the value of this property using a ball, while the
more accurate Vickers test uses a pyramid. CBN and some borides have very high levels of this property.
A sclerometer is used to measure the ‘scratch’ version of this property from the width of the deformity
left by a diamond under constant pressure. For the point, name this property of a mineral which can be
ranked on the Mohs scale and which is a measure of the resistance of a material to being deformed.
ANSWER: hardness (accept indentation hardness until “sclerometer”)




                                                   Page 1
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                    Round 3


(Tossup 6) The cuprate YBCO is one type of this material that can maintain the namesake property
above 77 Kelvin. Electrons pair up to form boson-like Cooper pairs in these materials according to
BCS theory. These materials expel their magnetic field in the Meissner effect. These materials were first
discovered by Heike Onnes and form below a critical temperature, where they suddenly have a persisting
current. For the point, name these materials characterized by zero electrical resistance.
ANSWER: superconductors (accept superconductivity; accept word forms like superconduction)


(Tossup 7) The “poverty of the stimulus” is an argument from this scientific field, sometimes defended by
reference to binding theory or anaphora. In this field, formants may be analyzed using a spectrogram of
the generated frequencies. Philology is a subfield of this field which attempts to trace historical patterns
in etymology such as by using cognates. Noam Chomsky put forth the theory of a universal grammar in,
for the point, what scientific field that studies the sounds, symbols, and rules of language?
ANSWER: linguistics (accept developmental linguistics or language learning until “formants”)


(Tossup 8) For a parabola, this word names the only point lying on the axis of symmetry, and on a
curve, this word can name any place where the first derivative is zero. The ‘two ears theorem’ states that
at least two of these points can be removed from a polygon without introducing a crossing. The Euler
characteristic of a polyhedron is the number of these points, minus the number of edges, plus the number
of faces. For the point, name these points in geometry where two lines meet, such as at an angle.
ANSWER: vertex (accept vertices or vertexes)


(Tossup 9) It’s not Chironomus, but the term “polytene” was coined for the large chromosomes observed
in this organism’s salivary glands. Thomas Hunt Morgan noted sex-linked traits in this organism’s mutant
white-eyed variant. This organism with four pairs of chromosomes has genetic linkage for curly and short
wings. For the point, name this model organism, an insect whose scientific genus is Drosophila.
ANSWER: fruit fly (accept Drosophila Melanogaster; accept Drosophila before mentioned; prompt
on fly; do not accept or prompt on other flies like house fly)


(Tossup 10) Relying on Planck’s constant, a Kibble one of these devices was used to redefine the unit it
measures in 2019. A Roberval one of these devices has six pivot points arranged in a parallelogram, while
an ancient one of these, the steelyard, requires a movable counterweight. A traditional school lab might
use a double pan or triple beam one of these devices, and modern electronic ones can be precise to one
microgram. For the point, name this device used to measure the mass of an object.
ANSWER: balance (accept scale)


(Tossup 11) This region is the outer limit of the sun’s Hill sphere, where the sun’s gravity can attract
satellites. The inner part of this region is sometimes named for Jack G. Hills, and this region was first
proposed by Ernst Öpik. Long-period comets are thought to originate in this region, and the material in
this region may have shifted outward from the scattered disc. For the point, name this region of space,
named for a Dutch astronomer, where the furthest solar system objects lie.
ANSWER: Öpik-Oort cloud



                                                  Page 2
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 3


(Tossup 12) This quantity is displayed on two axes of a psychrometric chart, and the ratio of the two
measures of quantity can be used to determine humidity. This quantity is plotted on the vertical axis of
the “hockey stick” graph, so-called due to this quantity’s recent increase as shown by past reconstructions
of this quantity. This quantity decreases with altitude in the troposphere, but not in the stratosphere,
leading to its namesake inversion. For the point, name this quantity which can be measured using a
thermometer.
ANSWER: air temperature


(Tossup 13) As bubbles form within this substance, scoria may be produced or amygdules may fill the
gaps. Small blocky rocks within this substance are called clinker, while smoother “pillow” formations of
this substance are common underwater. A coulee [koo-lee] may be formed when this substance forms a
dome and then continues to slowly flow. This substance can be classified into pahoehoe [pa-howay-howay]
and a’a [ah-ah] types based on its flow. For the point, name this substance, which is formed when molten
rock called magma reaches the Earth’s surface.
ANSWER: lava


(Tossup 14) In 2008, this pathogen was declared cured in the “Berlin patient.”. Opportunistic infections
like Pneumocystis pneumonia often follow infection by this pathogen. Truvada is a drug designed to
prevent infection by this pathogen. The drug Selzentry blocks it by binding to CCR5 receptors, while
AZT therapy inhibits this pathogen’s reverse transcriptase enzyme. Helper T-cells are the primary target
of this virus, resulting in collapse of the immune system. For the point, identify this retrovirus, which may
lead to AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV (accept human immunodeficiency virus; prompt on AIDS)


(Tossup 15) Due to osmium tetroxide’s ability to bind to alkenes in this vitamin, Sharpless dihydroxylation
was widely replaced with Upjohn dihydroxylation. An extended conjugated chain of alkenes makes up
this vitamin that isomerizes from cis- to trans- form in the presence of light. Golden rice is genetically
engineered rice that contains a precursor to this vitamin. Rhodopsin makes use of this vitamin, of which
beta-carotene and retinol are common sources. For the point, name this fat-soluble vitamin important for
healthy eyesight.
ANSWER: Vitamin A (prompt on retinol or retinal or retinoic acid; prompt on beta-carotene)


(Tossup 16) The Strecker synthesis forms these organic compounds by the reaction of an aldehyde and
ammonium chloride. These compounds are zwitterions at biological pH. A carboxylic [car-box-sill-ic] acid
and an amine group are on opposite ends of these organic compounds. The sequence of these compounds
is responsible for the formation of beta sheets and alpha helices. For the point, name these organic
compounds that include arginine and tryptophan, the basic building blocks of proteins.
ANSWER: amino acids




                                                   Page 3
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                      Round 3


(Tossup 17) The ATTZ near a river has an ecology based on the “pulse” of these events. Statistical
measurements of recurrence of these events have led the biggest ones to be dubbed “100-year” events. Slow
infiltration rates may cause these events, such as where asphalt or concrete makes soil impermeable.Arroyos
are susceptible to the “flash” type of these events. Levees are built to protect areas from, for the point,
what hydrological events in which water rises far above normal levels?
ANSWER: floods (accept word forms)


(Tossup 18) Annual meetings of those who have achieved this honor are held at Lindau. Nazi policy
forbade the acceptance of this honor by German scientists such as Richard Kuhn and Adolf Butenandt.
The premature publication of an obituary led to the founding of this honor by the inventor of dynamite.
Chemist Linus Pauling has won two of these honors in different categories. Awarded by various Swedish
and Norwegian committees, for the point, name this prestigious annual prize awarded to laureates in fields
such as medicine, physics, and peace.
ANSWER: Nobel prizes


(Tossup 19) The ratio of the rate of this process for two different gases is equal to the square root of their
molar masses, according to Graham’s Law of [this process]. William Sutherland derived a result commonly
named for Einstein where a coefficient of this process is equal to “mobility times Boltzmann’s constant
times absolute temperature”; that coefficient first appeared in Adolf Fick’s 1855 treatment of this process.
Water undergoes osmosis, a special case of this form of passive transport. For the point, name this process
of particles moving from high concentrations to low concentrations.
ANSWER: diffusion (accept effusion – a special case of diffusion described by Graham’s Law)


(Tossup 20) Goldreich and Tremaine demonstrated the chaotic orbits of one of these things was due to
“shepherding” between the moons Pandora and Prometheus. A major theory for the creation of these
things is a satellite falling into the Roche limit of its parent body. A prominent gap between these things
known as the Cassini Division is caused by the moon Mimas. The one named for Phoebe is tilted 27
degrees to the other icy ones that orbit the 6th planet from the sun. For the point, name these collections
of icy dust which orbit around Saturn.
ANSWER: planetary rings (or ring systems; accept rings of Saturn)


(Tossup 21) Ebonite is the result of this process when prolonged over an extended time and was originally
used in bowling balls and some clarinets. Allylic hydrogen bonds are replaced in this process, often at
around 130 degrees Celsius using an accelerator. Lower temperatures often create polysulfide links of
around 6 atoms, with shorter links appearing at higher temperatures. For the point, name this process of
heating and adding sulfur to rubber in order to strengthen and harden it, such as for making car tires.
ANSWER: vulcanization (accept word forms)




                                                   Page 4
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                     Round 3


(Tossup 22) In this author’s essay “General Scholium” he claimed to “feign no hypothesis” centering
around the second edition of his most famous work. After the Glorious Revolution, this scientist was
appointed Master of the Royal Mint. Edmund Halley convinced this scientist to publish his Principia
Mathematica after discovering that this man had solved Kepler’s laws of planetary motion. For the point,
name this mathematician who feuded with Leibniz over the discovery of calculus.
ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton


(Tossup 23) This phenomenon occurs when stepped leaders connect with upward streamers, and it may
create fulgurites in the soil. Collisions between ice crystals and graupel, which then separate to different
parts of a cloud, are thought to provide the charge for this phenomenon. Rapid expansion of surrounding
air due to heat creates the sound that often accompanies this phenomenon. For the point, name this
weather phenomenon, a visible flash of electrical current between the ground and a cloud.
ANSWER: lightning


(Tossup 24) Biomedical values of pressure are typically reported in millimeters of this element. Plastic-
laminated gloves are now required to handle this element’s dimethyl variant after the tragic death of
Dartmouth chemist, Karen Wetterhahn. Touching an iron nail to this element’s surface causes it to
oscillate wildly in its namesake “beating heart” experiment. This metal causes erethism, which is better
known as “mad hatter disease.” For the point, name this metal, known to alchemists as quicksilver and
symbolized Hg.
ANSWER: mercury (prompt on Hg)


(Tossup 25) The net value of this quantity is equal to the area under a process curve on a PV diagram. This
quantity for an object is equal to the path integral of the force field. By the first law of thermodynamics,
the change in internal energy is equal to head added to the system minus this quantity. This quantity is
equal to the change in kinetic energy. This quantity is zero for a tray carried perpendicular to the floor by
a walking waitress. For the point, name this quantity equal to force times distance, commonly symbolized
W.
ANSWER: work (done by a system)


(Tossup 26) Variations in this planet’s celestial movement over time are the cause of the Milankovitch
cycles. This planet is the densest in the solar system. Some believe that an object called Theia collided
with this planet, forming this planet’s only natural satellite. On this planet, the acceleration from gravity
measures about 9.8 meters per second squared. This planet is the subject of a photo known as the Pale
Blue Dot. For the point, name this planet, the only one known for sure to harbor life.
ANSWER: Earth




                                                   Page 5
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                   Round 3


(Tossup 27) A continued fraction must terminate if it is in this set of numbers. The real numbers can
be constructed from these numbers using Dedekind cuts. These numbers are symbolized by a bold Q.
According to legend, Pythagoras sentenced Hippasus to death by drowning for finding a number not of
this type. Fractional examples of these numbers include 4/7 [4 over 7] and 7/2 [7 over 2]. For the point,
name this subset of the real numbers which either repeat or terminate after a finite number of decimal
places, unlike pi or the square root of 2.
ANSWER: rational numbers (prompt on Q; prompt on fractions; do not accept or prompt on irrational)


(Tossup 28) Tamarack and larch are common pioneer species in this ecosystem, where climate change can
result in drunken trees. Most peat bogs are located within this biome. A well-documented predator-prey
relationship in this biome involves lynx and snowshoe hares, and its largest mammals include the moose
and Siberian tiger. Scandinavia, Russia and Canada are covered by, for the point, which biome marked by
heavy snowfall and evergreen trees like pine and spruce?
ANSWER: taiga (accept boreal forest or northern coniferous forest)


(Tossup 29) At 573 degrees Celsius, this mineral abruptly increases in volume as it changes into its
beta form. When mixed with its polymorph moganite, this mineral forms the rock chalcedony. This
mineral occupies the lowest positions in both Goldich’s dissolution series and Bowen’s reaction series,
This naturally-transparent material has specific colored variants such as citrine and amethyst. Made of a
tetrahedral structure of silicon and oxygen, for the point, name this common mineral whose crystals are
often used in clocks and watches.
ANSWER: quartz


(Tossup 30) This single letter symbolizes the amino acid that replaces glutamic acid in sickle-cell
hemoglobin. It is not N, but this letter appears squared in one term of the van der Waals equation. A
theory whose name begins with this letter predicts trigonal pyramidal geometry for ammonia. As a Roman
numeral, this letter represents the most common oxidation state of niobium, such as in the compound
niobium pentoxide. For the point, name this letter, the symbol of element 23, vanadium.
ANSWER: V


Backup

(Tossup 31) The lungs secrete DPPC and other lipid components to increase pulmonary compliance and
lower this quantity. This quantity is a linear function of temperature according to Eotvos’s [airt-varsh’s]
rule. A gradient in this quantity causes mass transfer due to the Marangoni effect, which causes the “tears
of wine” phenomenon. Surfactants lower this property of a liquid which is responsible for the meniscus
seen when a liquid is held in a tube. For the point, name this property caused by the cohesive forces
between molecules, which water striders take advantage of to stay afloat.
ANSWER: surface tension (prompt on tension)




                                                  Page 6
Science Bee Nationals 2018-2019                                                                 Round 3


(Tossup 32) Based on how they react to shearing forces, these substances can be described as rheopectic
or thixotropic. These substances are described by an equation whose smooth solutions are the subject of a
Millennium Prize problem. The Navier-Stokes equations describe these substances that are non-Newtonian
if they disobey Newton’s law of viscosity. For large Reynolds numbers, flow in these substances can
transition from laminar to turbulent. For the point, name these substances which can exist as a gas or a
liquid and are characterized by their ability to fill a vessel.
ANSWER: fluids (do not accept or prompt on liquid or gas)




                                                 Page 7
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                           Finals



                                               Finals
Regulation

(Tossup 1) The Fields Medal in Mathematics depicts an image of this man and a description of his sphere
and cylinder proof. This man used a primitive precursor of integral calculus to estimate pi, and in this
man’s On the Equilibrium of Planes, heagrave the earliest explanation of levers. The second volume of his
On Floating Bodies proposed his eponymous principle. For the point, identify this man, who according
to Vitruvius used that namesake principle to determine the metal composition of a crown by using water
displacement.
ANSWER: Archimedes

(Tossup 2) Examples of these activities include Hackenbush and Nim. A cellular automaton invented
by John Conway is known as one of these activities “of Life.” One of these activities that has benefits
balanced by costs is called “zero-sum.” A Nash equilibrium occurs if none of the participants in these
activities can gain by changing their strategy. For the point, name these activities like go and chess.
ANSWER: mathematical games


(Tossup 3) The Morrison formation is an abundant source of fossils from this geological period. During
this period, the supercontinent Pangea rifted to form Laurasia and Gondwana. The oldest known bird,
the Archaeopteryx [ar-KEE-op-ter-icks], lived in this geological period that also included the Stegosaurus.
For the point, name this middle period of the Mesozoic Era that took place after the Triassic and before
the Cretaceous period.
ANSWER: Jurassic period (accept Late Jurassic period)


(Tossup 4) It’s not the stomach, but some people have an extra part of this organ called the Duct of
Santorini. This organ’s Duct of Wirsung empties its contents into the duodenum. Amylin and glucagon
are produced by alpha and beta cells in this organ’s Islets of Langerhans. Type 1 diabetes targets, for the
point, what organ that secretes insulin?
ANSWER: Pancreas


(Tossup 5) This is the color of light produced by a protein isolated from the jellyfish Aequorea victoria.
That protein is used in cellular microscopy and is known as “this color” fluorescent protein. This most
common form of color blindness prevents afflicted individuals from seeing red and this color. This is the
color of unripened tomatoes which are a popular fried dish, and this color describes a classification of
trees that have leaves year round. For the point, name this color of most grass.
ANSWER: green (accept evergreen; accept green fluorescent protein)




                                                  Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                          Finals


(Tossup 6) This metal stabilizes two histidine and two cysteine residues. Gag knuckle is an example of a
DNA-binding domain named for this element’s “finger.” A coat of this element is added to steel or iron
to slow the process of rusting. Due to the value of this metal, the production cost of a penny, which is
mostly this element, is greater than 1 cent. Brass is formed by combining copper with, for the point, what
metal with atomic symbol Zn?
ANSWER: Zinc (accept Zn before it is read)


(Tossup 7) These organisms were labeled with Sulfur-35 and Phosphorus-32 to show that DNA contains
the information for inheritance in the Hershey-Chase experiment. These organisms, which can undergo
the lytic or lysogenic cycle, include the lambda and T-4 types, which often infect E. coli. For the point,
name these viruses that infect bacteria.
ANSWER: Bacteriophage (prompt on viruses)


(Tossup 8) A primitive type of these devices can use gun-type assembly to fire on piece of metal into
another. This technology was succeeded by a much more power version utilizing the Teller-Ulam design
which included a secondary stage fueled by heavy hydrogen isotopes. Centrifuges are required to separate
particular isotopes which are used for nuclear fission, typically of uranium or plutonium. For the point,
identify these weapons, only two of which have ever been used in combat near the end of World War II.
ANSWER: nuclear weapon (accept: atomic bomb; accept; nuclear bomb; accept atomic weapon)


(Tossup 9) This region is composed mostly of materials that contain magnesium and silicon. A remnant
from Keith Bullen’s naming system – the D-double-prime layer – is found in the lower portion of this
region. Containing the asthenosphere, this region is bounded by the Gutenberg and Moho discontinuities
and makes up most of the Earth’s volume. For the point, name this solid region divided into “upper” and
“lower” portions which is between the Earth’s core and crust.
ANSWER: Earth’s mantle (accept upper mantle; accept lower mantle)


(Tossup 10) WIMPs and MACHOs are two proposed bodies to explain the presence of this entity. This
entity was first suggested by Dutch astronomers Jacobus Kapteyn and Jan Oort. Galaxies that are thought
to contain this substance have faster rotation than what is calculated by just their visible mass. For the
point, name this mysterious form of matter, named because it does not emit any detectable light.
ANSWER: dark matter


(Tossup 11) In the Wallace effect, this process prevents the production of sterile hybrids to assist in
speciation. Examples of this process include changes in coloration of peppered moths and beak size
variation of Galapagos finches. For the point, name this process that preserves favorable variations in
organisms, proposed by Charles Darwin.
ANSWER: natural selection (prompt on evolution; do not accept sexual selection)




                                                 Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                                Finals


(Tossup 12) A gas’s value for this quantity is multiplied by total pressure to find the partial pressure of
a gas according to Dalton’s law. Colligative properties depend on this quantity, which can be found via
a titration. For the point, name this quantity, often measured using molarity, which refers to how much
solute is in an amount of solvent.
ANSWER: concentration


(Tossup 13) One form of this process results in the formation of three polar bodies due to unequal
cytoplasmic division. An error in this process leads to Turner syndrome and Down syndrome. Almost 90%
of this process’s total time occurs in Prophase I. For the point, name this method of cell division resulting
in four non-identical gametes.
ANSWER: Meiosis


(Tossup 14) One type of this rock is classified based on the size of its gravel clasts and is called
conglomerate. These rocks are often deposited in layers called strata. Examples of this rock type include
limestone and sandstone. For the point, name this type of rock formed from accumulation of settled
particles, contrasted with metamorphic and igneous.
ANSWER: Sedimentary rock


(Tossup 15) Three of these interactions are present between guanine and cytosine in DNA. Hydrogen
sulfide has a much lower boiling point than water because of these interactions. They are the reason that
ice is less dense than water. For the point, name these weak noncovalent bonds in which the lightest
element is shared between two atoms.
ANSWER: hydrogen bond (accept H-bond; prompt on bond)


(Tossup 16) Simpson’s rule uses this shape to approximate integrals. This shape can be formed by
intersecting a plane with a cone parallel to its slant height. This curve is the locus of all points equidistant
from the focus and the directrix. For the point, name this conic section with eccentricity of one, the graph
of a quadratic function.
ANSWER: Parabola


(Tossup 17) The first appearance of this class of arthropods defines the start of the third stage of
the Cambrian era, and this class would survive mass extinctions until finally going extinct at the
Permian-Triassic extinction. A horseshoe shaped “head shield” or cephalon was one of the defining three
lobes of this class. For the point, identify this class of marine arthropods, which with over 17,000 identified
species, is considered the most diverse class of animals that has gone entirely extinct, a class named for
their three lobes their body was divided into.
ANSWER: Trilobites (accept Trilobita)




                                                    Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                              Finals


(Tossup 18) In 1992 the first exoplanets were discovered orbiting one of these objects. The Pioneer
and Voyager spacecraft each have a map showing the location of our sun relative to several of these
objects. Jocelyn Bell Burnell and Antony Hewish discovered the first of these objects, and at first could
not discount that they had detected an artificial radio broadcast. For the point, identify these objects, a
type of neutron star which is believed to emit a beam of radiation along its magnetic poles which can be
detected as these objects rotate.
ANSWER: Pulsars (prompt on neutron star(s) until the word map is read)


(Tossup 19) A phenylalanine residue is deleted in the Delta-F508 mutation causing this disorder. In
infants, this condition is diagnosed via a bowel obstruction called meconium ileus. Pilocarpine is drawn
under the skin to screen for this disorder in a sweat test. This autosomal recessive genetic condition occurs
when a mutated CFTR protein cannot transport chloride ions, leading to thick mucus buildup in the
lungs. For ten points, name this disorder abbreviated CF.
ANSWER: cystic fibrosis (accept CF before it is read)


(Tossup 20) Plotting this quantity against time yields a curve which plateaus at a maximum value
symbolized K. Bottlenecks result from a decrease in this quantity, which can be found by marking
individuals and then recapturing a random sample. For the point, name this quantity, the number of
organisms of a given species in an area.
ANSWER: population size (accept either underlined word; accept number of individuals)


(Tossup 21) Organisms in the root nodules of legumes break down the strong triple bond holding this
molecule together. This compound is broken down using an iron catalyst in the Haber process, which
produces two molecules of ammonia. For the point, name this gas “fixed” by some plants, the most
abundant in the atmosphere.
ANSWER: Dinitrogen gas (accept N2)


(Tossup 22) Fatty acids are reacted with these compounds in saponification reactions to form soaps.
These compounds donate electron pairs according to the Lewis definition and dissociate in water to form
hydroxide ions in the Arrhenius definition. For the point, name these compounds with a pH greater than
7, contrasted with acids.
ANSWER: bases


(Tossup 23) Patients with HNPCC have a higher risk of developing cancer in this organ. It is examined
during a sigmoidoscopy, which is like another procedure that inspects this organ using a fiber optic camera
on a flexible tube to detect polyps or ulcerative colitis. The first part of this organ contains the cecum and
the appendix. For the point, name this part of the gastrointestinal tract that absorbs water from waste
received from the small intestine.
ANSWER: large intestines (accept colon; prompt on rectum)




                                                   Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                           Finals


(Tossup 24) This quantity can be calculated by multiplying rho times length over cross-sectional area.
Power is equal to the product of this quantity and current squared. This quantity is the reciprocal of
conductance. Voltage divided by current gives, for the point, what electrical quantity measured in ohms?
ANSWER: resistance


(Tossup 25) The Lancet published a controversial paper about these preparations authored by Andrew
Wakefield that purported to have found a link between them and autism. Boosters are used to revamp
antigen levels first established by these substances. For the point, name these biological preparations of
viral particles, designed to teach the body to adapt to a pathogen such as smallpox or measles.
ANSWER: vaccines


(Tossup 26) The largest family of these animals is the Nymphalidae, also known as the brush-footed
example. Birdwings are examples of the swallowtail variety of these animals. One of these animals of the
genus Danaus is also named for its consumption of milkweed. Mimicry is commonly displayed in these
animals, such as the viceroy. For the point, name these colorful flying insects that include the migrating
orange “monarch” variety.
ANSWER: butterfly (accept butterflies)


(Tossup 27) About two and a half of these particles are released upon the fission of U-238. An experiment
discrediting the gamma ray hypothesis proved the existence of these particles and was carried out by
James Chadwick. Isotopes of an element differ in the number of, for the point, what subatomic particle
with no electric charge?
ANSWER: neutron


(Tossup 28) In the technique developed by Yamanaka, these cells can be induced using a cocktail of Sox2,
Oct-4, and Nanog. Plants produce these cells in the apical meristem. In humans these cells are found in
the umbilical cord and bone marrow, and they can be totipotent or pluripotent. For the point, name these
cells that can differentiate into specialized cells that come in adult and embryonic types.
ANSWER: stem cells


(Tossup 29) Of this island’s three original volcanic cones, only Rakata partially survives. A fourth cone
that emerged from the remains of this island partially collapsed in December 2018 and triggered a tsunami
in the Sunda Strait. One eruption from this volcanic island killed over 35,000 people, and altered global
climate for the next two years. For the point, identify this Indonesian island which lost two-thirds of its
landmass in the explosive eruption of August 1883.
ANSWER: Krakatau (accept Krakatoa)




                                                  Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                         Finals


(Tossup 30) One man with this last name discovered nitrogen in 1772. Another man with this last name
created a namesake experiment that was also called the Geiger-Marsden experiment. That man with
this last name fired alpha particles through gold foil. For the point, give the last name of Ernest, who
discovered the atomic nucleus.
ANSWER: Rutherford (accept Daniel Rutherford; accept Ernest Rutherford)


Replacements

(Tossup 31) The concentration of an allotrope of this element is measured in Dobson units. Cyanobacteria
contribute to a rapid increase in levels of this element in a namesake “great event.” This element was
called “dephlogisticated air” by Joseph Priestley. For the point, name this element present in ozone.
ANSWER: oxygen

(Tossup 32) Endosomes fuse with these organelles and deliver mannose-6-phosphate receptors carrying
hydrolases. Enzyme mutations lead to “storage” disorders in these organelles like Tay-Sachs disease.
Enzymes in this organelle work best at a very low pH. For the point, name this organelle that digests
macromolecules and cellular waste.
ANSWER: Lysosome




                                                Page 6
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                           Round 2



                                             Round 2
Regulation

(Tossup 1) When this phenomenon is present at different frequencies, the difference is detected as a beat.
Because this phenomenon cannot travel in a vacuum, it is absent in outer space. Mach 1 is the speed of
this phenomenon, a longitudinal wave whose strength is measured in decibels. For the point, name this
phenomenon that causes sonic booms.
ANSWER: sound

(Tossup 2) This planet was the focus of the Viking program which revealed the existence of “Chaos
terrain.” A volcano over two times as high as Mount Everest, the Olympus Mons, is located on this planet.
In 2011, NASA landed the Curiosity rover on this planet to search for traces of ancient water. For the
point, name this 4th planet from the sun, whose iron-rich soil gives its surface a red color.
ANSWER: Mars


(Tossup 3) Argillaceous minerals are defined as containing this material whose minerals include chlorite
and smectite. This material is on the bottom of the Wentworth scale as it is finer than all material
including silt. Terracotta is made from refining this material. For the point, name this natural material
that is often glazed and fired in a kiln in pottery making.
ANSWER: clay


(Tossup 4) Alfred Nobel’s blasting caps used a fulminate of this element. Amalgams are alloys containing
this metal, whose height fluctuations inside a tube were used to measure air pressure in the first barometer.
The FDA recommends that young children and pregnant women avoid eating swordfish due to high levels
of this toxic metal. Name this liquid metal with symbol Hg.
ANSWER: mercury (accept Hg before it is read)


(Tossup 5) The speed of these substances can be measured by their turnover number, and they are
“homogeneous” if they are in the same phase as the reactants. Iron serves as one of these substances in the
Haber-Bosch process. Enzymes are biological examples of these compounds that lower activation energy
of a reaction. For the point, name these compounds that speed up a reaction without being consumed.
ANSWER: catalysts (prompt on enzymes before it is read)


(Tossup 6) If these structures have no petiole, they are called sessile. The C4 pathway isolates carbon
fixation to bundle sheath cells in these structures, though most other plants utilize the palisade and
spongy mesophyll in them. A waxy cuticle coats these structures, which exchange gas through pores called
stomata. These primary sites of photosynthesis change color and fall due to seasonal changes. For the
point, name these flat plant structures.
ANSWER: leaf (accept leaves)




                                                   Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 2


(Tossup 7) Wires with non-zero values for this quantity produce a magnetic field. The same amount of
this quantity must enter and leave a junction according to Kirchhoff’s law for this quantity. By Ohm’s
Law, voltage over resistance is equal to this quantity. This quantity is symbolized I and is measured in
Amperes. For the point, name this quantity that measures the flow of electric charge per second, and can
either be alternating or direct.
ANSWER: electric current (accept alternating current; accept direct current)


(Tossup 8) For two substances, the mixture with the lowest value for this temperature is called
eutectic. Certain substances undergo crystallization after reaching this temperature. One property of
this temperature for a substance is that it is lowered when another substance is added. For water, this
temperature, at which it transitions to ice, is 0 degrees Celsius. For the point, name this temperature at
which a substance changes from a solid to a liquid.
ANSWER: melting point (accept freezing point)


(Tossup 9) This scientist names a conjecture about packing spheres into the most space possible. He’s
not Newton, but this scientist’s second law states that an object sweeps out equal area in equal time. This
astronomer worked under Tycho [TIKE-oh] Brahe and proposed the planets move in ellipses in his book
the Epitome of Copernican Astronomy. For the point, name this 17th century German astronomer who
names three laws of planetary motion.
ANSWER: Johannes Kepler


(Tossup 10) Lactic acid is transported from muscles to this organ to produce glucose in the Cori cycle.
The falciform ligament divides this organ into left and right lobes. This largest internal organ in the
body produces a digestive fluid that is stored in the gallbladder. Excessive alcohol consumption can cause
cirrhosis, or scarring, of this organ. For the point, name this organ that produces bile, detoxifies blood,
and becomes inflamed in hepatitis.
ANSWER: liver


(Tossup 11) A gas equal to one of this unit at standard temperature and pressure will fill up 22.4 liters of
volume. This SI unit is equivalent to the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon 12. Avagadro’s number
relates one of this unit to 6.022 times 10 to the 23rd molecules or atoms. For the point, name this unit in
chemistry which shares its name with a small burrowing mammal.
ANSWER: mole


(Tossup 12) The Smithsonian’s National Museum of American History displayed a giant one of these
devices until 1998 that was named for Jean Foucault – who first used this device to demonstrate the
rotation of the earth. The double variety of this device displays chaotic motion. In 1656, Christiaan
Huygens invented a clock that kept time with this device. For the point, name this device, a suspended
mass that’s used in Grandfather clocks.
ANSWER: pendulum (or Foucault’s pendulum; accept pendulum clock; prompt on clock)




                                                  Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                           Round 2


(Tossup 13) This organ has sebaceous glands that secrete fluid, and vitiligo affects this organ. Vitamin D
is synthesized when UV light hits this organ. One type of cancer of this structure is known as melanoma.
The outer layer of this structure is the epidermis, and this is the largest organ in the body. For the point,
name this protective layer that covers the body and is harmed in sunburns.
ANSWER: skin


(Tossup 14) Robert Mulliken devised a scheme for calculating this quantity that takes the arithmetic
mean of the first ionization energy and electron affinity. Polar bonds occur when the difference in this
quantity between bonded elements is greater than 0.8. Linus Pauling developed the idea of this quantity,
and gave fluorine the highest value for it. For the point, name this quantity that represents an atom’s
tendency to attract electrons.
ANSWER: electronegativity


(Tossup 15) Synthesis of this molecule by HMG-CoA reductase is blocked by drugs called statins.
This molecule’s four-ring structure helps it regulate membrane fluidity. This molecule is transported
through the body by HDL and LDL, often called its “good” and “bad” types. High levels of it can cause
atherosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries. Cardiovascular disease has been linked to high levels of, for
the point, what waxy, fat-like substance?
ANSWER: cholesterol


(Tossup 16) This location is home to manganese nodules, collections of iron and rock often found on
abyssal plains. Alternately charged layers of polarized rock in this location serve as evidence for the
reversal of Earth’s magnetic poles. This region expands due to its namesake spreading which explains
continental drift. For the point, name this location, the bottom of Earth’s oceans.
ANSWER: seafloor (accept seabed; accept ocean floor; accept abyssal plains before it is read;
prompt on ocean; prompt on sea)


(Tossup 17) These structures can contain alternating light and dark areas called ogives which are formed
as part of their seasonal movement. Fjords are created by these objects when they cut through bedrock.
Icebergs break off of these larger masses in a process called calving. For the point, name these large,
moving bodies of ice.
ANSWER: glaciers


(Tossup 18) In an effect named for this device, gravity causes the bending of light. A formula describing
these objects simplifies when these devices are very thick or thin. That formula contains terms for two
radii, thickness, and focal length. These objects produce real and virtual images depending on whether
they are concave or convex. For the point, name these optical devices that focus light to a single point.
ANSWER: lens [accept word forms like lenses and lensing]




                                                   Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                        Round 2


(Tossup 19) Problem 48 of the Rhind papyrus computes the area of a field in this shape, while Book 3
of Euclid’s Elements and Plato’s Seventh Letter explain the properties of this shape. The Lindemann-
Weierstrass theorem made the task of squaring this shape impossible.The sagitta is a line segment drawn
between the midpoint of a chord and arc of this shape. For the point, name this shape whose area is pi
multiplied by its radius squared.
ANSWER: circles


(Tossup 20) The energy of this reaction can be measured by a Bomb calorimeter. Types of this reaction
include smoldering and spontaneous. This exothermic reaction produces carbon dioxide and water from
oxygen and a hydrocarbon fuel source, and they occur commonly in diesel engines. For the point, name
this reaction of blowing stuff up that commonly results in flames.
ANSWER: combustion reaction


(Tossup 21) Excess protein in the urine of a person with this condition may indicate pre-eclampsia.
Chorionic villus sampling and amniocentesis are used to detect genetic disorders during this condition.
People with this condition are prescribed folic acid to prevent neural tube defects, and may also visit an
obstetrician to receive an ultrasound. For the point, name this condition that lasts around 9 months and
concludes with childbirth.
ANSWER: pregnancy (accept pregnant; accept gestation; accept obvious equivalents)


(Tossup 22) These structures can form out of demineralized pockets known as incipient lesions. It’s not
trauma-related, but gutta percha and a crown are used in a surgery to fill a deep one of these structures.
An untreated one of these structures can require root canal surgery. Build up of plaque can cause the
formation of these structures in the enamel. For the point, name these holes that form from tooth decay
that dentists fill.
ANSWER: cavity (accept cavities; accept dental caries; prompt on “tooth decay”; prompt on “holes”
in the teeth)


(Tossup 23) The energy from these objects can hypothetically be captured using a Dyson sphere. Limits
on the formation of these objects include the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit and the Chandrasekhar
limit. Extremely dense ones are made up of neutrons, and these objects are plotted on a Hertzsprung-
Russel diagram. Some of them explode into highly luminous supernovas when they die. For the point,
name these astral balls of burning gas that include the Sun.
ANSWER: stars (accept neutron stars; prompt on “white dwarf”)


(Tossup 24) Pedalogy is the study of this substance whose profile is made up by the O, A, B, C, and
R horizons. Along with dust and rocks, regolith is made up of this substance. Desertification results in
the loss of nutrition in this material. Clay, silt and sand make up this substance which is formed from
bedrock. Dirt is the common name of, for the point, what substance which plants grow in?
ANSWER: soil (or regolith until mentioned; accept dirt until mentioned)




                                                 Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 2


(Tossup 25) Duchenne and Becker name a dystrophy of this tissue which operates by sliding myosin and
actin filaments. One form of this tissue has a structural unit known as sarcomeres. This tissue has smooth
and cardiac types, while its skeletal type is connected to bone through tendons. Lactic acid is secreted in
this tissue during a workout. For the point, name this tissue that makes up the deltoids, trapezius, and
biceps.
ANSWER: muscle tissue (accept skeletal muscles)


(Tossup 26) The North American population of ferns spiked more than 70% following this event. The
eruption of the Deccan Traps may have contributed to this event. A global layer of iridium and the
Chicxulub crater in the Yucatan are both linked to this event, which the ancestors of birds survived. For
the point, name this event from 65 million years ago that saw the end of species like Triceratops and
Tyrannosaurus.
ANSWER: extinction of the dinosaurs (accept Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction, K-Pg extinction,
Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction, K-T extinction)


(Tossup 27) This element is consumed in the CNO cycle of nuclear fusion in stars. Interactions named
for this element hold together DNA strands. Isotopes of this element include tritium and deuterium.
Interactions between this element and elements like nitrogen and oxygen cause this element’s namesake
“bonds.” pH stands for the “power of this element”. For the point, name this lightest element with atomic
number 1 and symbol H.
ANSWER: hydrogen (accept H before it is read)


(Tossup 28) The behavior of these substances are governed by a set of relations called the Navier-Stokes
equations. In these substances a change in speed is caused by an opposite change in pressure according to
Bernoulli’s law. When one of these substances has a high viscosity, it tends to resist motion. Oobleck and
and shampoo are two examples of the non-Newtonian form of this type of substance. For the point, name
this type of substance with no fixed shape, exemplified by oil and water.
ANSWER: fluid


(Tossup 29) An enlarged sesamoid [sess-ah-moyd] bone gives this animal a pseudo-thumb which may
help it feed. This animal’s scientific name, Ailuropoda melanoleuca [ail-oo-roh-poh-da mel-an-oh-lu-kah]
incorrectly identifies this animal as a black-and-white cat. This animal is a member of the order carnivora,
but its diet is almost exclusively bamboo. For the point, identify this endangered animal, today considered
a distant relative of bears which is native to the mountains of central China.
ANSWER: Giant panda


(Tossup 30) This process can occur chronically in Klein-Levin syndrome. Cataplexy is a common
symptom associated with a disease in which this process occurs suddenly. Release of melatonin causes
the onset of this process, and apnea occurs when breathing is disrupted during this process. This process
can happen without warning in people suffering from narcolepsy. For the point, name this process during
which dreams occur.
ANSWER: sleep (accept REM; prompt on dreaming)


                                                  Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Round 2


Replacements

(Tossup 31) In 1979, Jimmy Carter installed 32 of these devices for the White House that were uninstalled
in 1986 by Ronald Reagan. Recent dust storms on Mars have covered these devices on the Opportunity
rover. These devices create electricity through the photovoltaic effect and account for 1.3% of global power
. For the point, name these devices that convert light from the sun into usable energy.
ANSWER: photovoltaic solar panels (accept solar cells; accept photovoltaic cells; prompt on cells)

(Tossup 32) Urbain Le Verrier hypothesized that irregularities in the orbit of this planet were due to a
yet undiscovered planet he called Vulcan. The MESSANGER probe orbited this planet for 4 years before
entering the final phase of its mission and crashing to the surface. This planet completes an orbit around
the sun every 88 days, less than half the time it takes Venus to do the same. For the point, name this
closest planet to the sun.
ANSWER: Mercury




                                                  Page 6
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                             Finals



                                               Finals
Regulation

(Tossup 1) A mutualistic relationship between these structures and fungi is called Mycorrhizae [My-co-
rie-za]. Rhizobia in nodules of these structures help legumes with nitrogen fixation. Edible examples of
these structures include beets and carrots. For the point, name these structures that anchor plants to the
ground and helps them to absorb water and nutrients.
ANSWER: roots

(Tossup 2) A paper by Alpher-Bethe-Gamow explains nucleosynthesis of heavier elements after this event.
The theory of this event was opposed by Hoyle’s steady-state theory even though Hoyle coined the term
for this event. The cosmic microwave background is remnant radiation from this event which caused the
universe to undergo rapid inflation. For the point, name this event that occurred at the beginning of the
universe.
ANSWER: Big Bang


(Tossup 3) The fluoroantimonic one is the strongest known example of these compounds in the world.
Arrhenius defined them as increasing hydrogen ion concentration in water, while they are proton donors
in the Bronsted-Lowry definition. Varieties of these compounds include nitric, sulfuric and acetic. For the
point, name these compounds that have a pH of less than 7.
ANSWER: acids


(Tossup 4) The lysosome receives products from this organelle that are tagged with mannose-6-phosphate.
This organelle receives proteins from the ER on its cis face and it is made of stacks called cisternae. Its
main function is processing proteins into vesicles for transport. For the point, name this organelle that is
named after an Italian scientist.
ANSWER: Golgi body (accept Golgi apparatus)


(Tossup 5) The most common rare-earth variety of these objects are made of neodymium-iron-boron or
samarium-cobalt. Lodestone contains a certain mineral that allows it to behave as one of these objects.
The field produced by these objects is measured in Teslas and can be visualized with iron fillings. For the
point, name these objects with a north and south pole that can attract certain metals
ANSWER: permanent magnets (accept magnetic field; prompt on rare earth metals)


(Tossup 6) Black Mamba venom is known to contain dendrotoxins which interact with the potassium
channels of these cells. A famous autoimmune disease associated with these cells results from damage
to their myelin sheath lining. These cells have inspired namesake networks that are now commonly
implemented in machine learning and artificial intelligence. For the point, name these electrically excitable
cells composed of a cell body and an axon, which make up the nervous system.
ANSWER: Neurons (accept nerve cell; accept neurone)



                                                   Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                           Finals


(Tossup 7) This bacteria metabolizes lactose and tryptophan using gene operons. A deadly strain of this
bacteria is labelled O157:H7, and outbreaks of that strain have been linked to romaine lettuce. Normally,
this bacteria is unharmful and even aids in digestion. For the point, name this bacterium that lives in
intestines and like Salmonella, can cause food poisoning.
ANSWER: Escherichia coli


(Tossup 8) Ernst Hartwig observed the only known Supernova to have occurred in this body. This body
was originally classified as a nebula before Edwin Hubble discovered Cepheid variable stars inside of it in
1925. This largest member of the Local Group is predicted to collide with our galaxy in several billion
years. For the point, name this closest spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.
ANSWER: Andromeda galaxy (accept Messier 31)


(Tossup 9) The rarest naturally occurring element in the Earth’s crust is a member of this group of
elements. One member of this group of elements is used to kill bacteria in swimming pools. Tennessine and
Astatine are members of this group and other members of this group create strong acids with hydrogen
– such as hydrochloric acid. Iodine, bromine and chlorine are members of, for the point, what group of
elements that are to the left of the group 18 noble gases?
ANSWER: halogens (accept group 17; prompt on “chlorine”; prompt on “astatine”)


(Tossup 10) Material is rapidly added or removed from one of these structures in a Slug test. Darcy’s
Law, in combination with the conservation of mass, can determine the flow rate within these structures.
The artesian variety of these formations undergo positive pressure and are often made into wells. For the
point, name these layers of underground porous rocks which store water.
ANSWER: aquifers


(Tossup 11) The entropy of vaporization is defined as heat of vaporization divided by this quantity.
Gibbs free energy is equal to enthalpy minus entropy times this quantity. Increasing this quantity will
also increase the pressure of a gas. For the point, name this measure of average kinetic energy, a quantity
measured in Kelvin, Celsius, and Fahrenheit.
ANSWER: temperature


(Tossup 12) Optical tweezers work by using these devices to exert radiation pressure on atoms. Q-switching
and modelocking are ways to produce pulses on the order of femtoseconds with these devices. These
devices work by inducing population inversion to create a stream of stimulated emission. For the point,
name these devices that produce a concentrated beam of light.
ANSWER: lasers (or light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation)




                                                  Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                             Finals


(Tossup 13) These compounds can be depicted using Hayworth or Fischer projections, and they have
a 1:2:1 ratio of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Examples of these compounds in plants include cellulose
and starch. Calories primarily come from fats, proteins, and these macromolecules. Glucose, sucrose, and
fructose are sweet examples of, for the point, what macromolecule making up most of bread?
ANSWER: carbohydrates (or sugars; accept polysaccharides; accept monosaccarides; anti-prompt
on “glucose” with “Can you be less specific?”)


(Tossup 14) Within molecules, these regions can be bonding or anti-bonding. The Bohr radius refers to
the smallest radius of one of these regions. Mixing of these regions is called hybridization, and the Aufbau
principle governs how they are filled. These regions are classified as s, p, d or f. For the point, name this
term for the region where electrons are likely to be found around an atom.
ANSWER: orbitals


(Tossup 15) After revealing this product, the presenter on this product placed an order for 4,000 lattes
to go. Earlier in that presentation on this product, a conference call was held between Jony Ive and
Phil Schiller. The 10th version of this product removed touch ID in favor of a facial recognition system.
The voice assistant Siri was added in this product’s 4th generation. For the point, name this line of
smartphones designed by Apple.
ANSWER: iPhone (accept specific models)


(Tossup 16) The noctilucent variety of this phenomena forms from ice crystals and is only visible during
twilight. The study of this phenomena is known as nephology, and it occurs when saturated air is cooled
to its dew point. When they occur at high altitudes, they can form mares’ tails, and “contrails” are an
artificial example formed by airplanes. Cirrus, stratus and cumulonimbus are varieties of, for the point,
what phenomena that takes on a white fluffy shape in the sky?
ANSWER: clouds


(Tossup 17) “Basal drag” is a theory that describes the motion of these objects. These objects include the
ancient Farallon whose modern remnants include the Juan de Fuca. Alfred Wegener’s theory of continental
drift helped establish a model of these objects which can sink into the mantle at subduction zones. These
objects come in continental and oceanic types. For the point, name these moving sections of Earth’s crust.
ANSWER: tectonic plates (accept plate tectonics; prompt on partial answers)


(Tossup 18) This disease is characterized by the accumulation of alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies. L-DOPA
is used to treat this disease that is caused by the death of dopamine producing cells. It’s named for a
British Doctor who wrote about it in Essay on the Shaking Palsy This disease’s cure is sought out by the
Michael J. Fox foundation. For the point, name this disease that is characterized by slowness of movement
and tremors.
ANSWER: Parkinson’s disease (accept PD)




                                                   Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                            Finals


(Tossup 19) A species found in this biome, the common basilisk, is nicknamed the “Jesus Lizard” for
its ability to walk on water. The Ituri is an example of this ecosystem home to the okapi also known as
the zebra giraffe. This biome accounts for over half of the world’s plants and animal species. This type of
ecosystem is found throughout much of the Congo River basin in Central Africa. For the point, name this
ecosystem characterized by tall broadleaf trees and a high rate of precipitation.
ANSWER: rainforests (accept tropical rainforests; accept Amazon rainforest prompt on forest;
prompt on tropics; prompt on jungle)


(Tossup 20) This shape is used to represent the D’Alambertian operator. Early mathematicians attempted
to construct this shape with equal area to a circle using only a compass and a straight edge. Inheritance
ratio in offspring can be determined using a version of this shape named for Punnett. The area of this
shape is equal to one of its side lengths times itself. For the point, name this shape of four right angles
and four equal side lengths.
ANSWER: square (accept box; prompt on quadrilateral)


(Tossup 21) The outbursts of luminous blue variables are sometimes mistaken for these events. One
version of this event creates zombie stars. White dwarves that surpass the Chandrasekhar limit will
undergo this event. One of these events created the Crab Nebula. For the point, name these events, in
which huge stars explode.
ANSWER: supernovae (accept specific types of supernovae)


(Tossup 22) A facility in Arizona called the VLA [vee-el-ay] uses 27 of these devices, often in tandem,
while 18 smaller mirrors will make up the segmented mirror in one of these named for James Webb. A
famous one of these devices required the COSTAR module to be installed in 1993 to serve as corrective
optics, and the largest refracting type of this device is located at Yerkes Observatory in Wisconsin. For
the point, name these devices used for looking at celestial objects.
ANSWER: Telescopes (accept radio telescope before mirrors)


(Tossup 23) The magnitude of this force is equal to the product of density, volume, and gravity. This force
is the result of increasing pressure at lower depths. It was legendarily used by a Greek mathematician
to determine if a crown was gold. “Any floating object displaces its own weight of fluid” by this force
according to Archimedes’ principle. For the point, name this tendency of an object to stay afloat.
ANSWER: buoyancy (accept upthrust; accept buoyant force)


(Tossup 24) This scientist names ten “field equations” that relates his namesake tensor to the stress-energy
tensor. This scientist’s paper on Brownian motion and his explanation of the photoelectric effect won
him the 1921 Nobel prize in Physics. This physicist fixed the speed of light as a constant in all reference
frames in his formulation of special relativity. For the point, name this scientist who proposed the famous
rest-mass equation E equals m, c squared.
ANSWER: Albert Einstein




                                                  Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                           Finals


(Tossup 25) When these objects share an orbit with a planet or moon, they are termed Trojans. The
search that resulted in the discovery of the first of these objects was triggered by a prediction made by
the Titus-Bode Law, which predicted a planet about 2.8 AU [ay-yu] from the sun. In December 2018, the
OSIRIS-REX mission reached Bennu, one of these objects, to collect samples and return them to Earth.
For the point, identify these objects, most of which orbit the sun between Mars and Jupiter in a namesake
“belt”.
ANSWER: Asteroids


(Tossup 26) The coral population in the Indo-Pacific region is harmed by the crown-of-thorns variety of
this group. These inverterbrates make up the class Asteroidea and use suction from their tube feet to pull
apart mollusk shells. The five limbs of these creatures can regenerate when cut off. For the point, name
these spiny creatures that live on ocean floors and whose five outspread arms cause them to resemble
items found in the night sky.
ANSWER: starfish (or sea stars; prompt on Echinoderms; prompt on Echinodermata)


(Tossup 27) The oldest known example of one of these structures on the Wadi Rajil was located in
the local town of Jawa. The largest of these structures is the Three Gorges one in Yichang, China. An
“arch-gravity” one of these structures impounds Lake Mead on the Nevada, Arizona border, generating
a massive amount of hydroelectric power. Beavers construct natural versions of, for the point, what
structures that hold back water across a river or lake exemplified by one named for Herbert Hoover.
ANSWER: dams


(Tossup 28) This virus’s gp41 and gp120 proteins help target it to CD4 receptors. Opportunistic infections
as a result of this virus can cause Kaposi’s Sarcoma. The proliferation of this virus is slowed down by
drugs like AZT which work by inhibiting this virus’s reverse transcriptase. This retrovirus infects helper
T cells of the immune system. For the point, name this virus that weakens the immune system and leads
to AIDS.
ANSWER: HIV (accepthuman immunodeficiency virus; prompt on AIDS before it is read; prompt on
acquired immune deficiency syndrome before AIDS is read)


(Tossup 29) Protein structure is stabilized by bridges of this element. The contact process generates a
strong, diprotic acid containing this element. One compound of iron and this element is called fool’s gold,
while oxides of nitrogen and this element are the pollutants that cause acid rain. This element, formerly
called brimstone, is responsible for the smell of rotten eggs. For the point, name this yellow element with
atomic number 16.
ANSWER: sulfur




                                                  Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 1 2018-2019                                                          Finals


(Tossup 30) Inge Lehmann discovered that this region was actually split into two distinct parts. The
presence of this region causes the P-wave shadow zone observed after an earthquake. This region’s upper
boundary is named for Gutenberg. The liquid part of this region is responsible for Earth’s magnetic field.
For the point, name this region of the Earth made up of iron and nickel, beneath the mantle, that has
“inner” and “outer” parts.
ANSWER: Earth’s core (do not accept or prompt on inner core or outer core)


Replacements

(Tossup 31) The “Fate has ordained” speech was prepared for but never delivered during this event. Jim
Lovell was replaced by Michael Collins before this event; during this event, Collins was the Command
Module pilot. Famous quotations from this mission include “The Eagle has landed” and “one giant leap
for mankind”. For the point, Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong traveled on what first mission to the moon?
ANSWER: Apollo 11 (prompt on anything referring to a moon landing or going to the moon)

(Tossup 32) This planet was first visited by Pioneer 10 and more recently by the spacecraft Juno. Comet
Shoemaker-Levy 9 collided into this planet in 1994. This planet’s moon Io is the most volcanically active
body in the solar system, while its moons Europa and Ganymede may have subsurface oceans. The Great
Red Spot is on, for the point, which largest planet in the solar system?
ANSWER: Jupiter




                                                 Page 6
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                         Round 2



                                            Round 2
Regulation

(Tossup 1) This material’s pigment is determined by the agouti gene. Cells named for this material
move with the basilar membrane in the inner ear. It’s not nails, but the separation of disulfide bonds in
cysteine-rich keratin is the reason burning this material smells bad. This material grows from follicles in
the skin. For the point, name this material, unique to mammals, which typically grows on the head.
ANSWER: hair (accept fur)

(Tossup 2) Urbain Le Verrier computed the orbit of this object, but it was discovered by Johann Galle
[galuh] in 1846. Discovered in 1989, the Great Dark Spot discovered on this planet had disappeared by
1994. One moon which orbits this planet is noted for its cryo-volcanoes and retrograde orbit, indicating
it might have been a Kuiper [ky-per] Belt object, that moon being Triton. The reclassification of Pluto
resulted in, for the point, what planet becoming the outermost planet in the solar system?
ANSWER: Neptune


(Tossup 3) In many desert species, the CAM pathway assimilates this compound at night. The most
abundant enzyme on Earth, rubisco, binds to this compound in the first step of the Calvin cycle. Stomata
open to let this gas enter leaves, while its storage by ancient plants is reversed when coal is burned. For
the point, name this three-atom gas taken in by plants during photosynthesis that is converted to the
sugar glucose.
ANSWER: carbon dioxide (accept CO2)


(Tossup 4) In the game surrounding the Collatz conjecture, if the previous term does not have this
property the next term will be equal to three times the previous term plus one. Goldbach’s conjecture
proposes that every number with this property can be written as the sum of two primes. Functions
described by this property are symmetric over the y-axis. Only one prime number has this property. For
the point, name these numbers divisible by two.
ANSWER: even numbers


(Tossup 5) These organisms use choanocytes to move food past microvilli, which absorb nutrients in
the process of filter-feeding. The bodies of these organisms contain a gelatinous matrix called a mesohyl.
These organisms lack symmetry and internal organs. For the point, name this phylum of simple sessile,
aquatic organisms.
ANSWER: Sponges (accept Porifera)




                                                  Page 1
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                             Round 2


(Tossup 6) This molecule is released in the formation of a peptide bond. Desiccants made up silica gel
and other material are used to absorb this molecule. The most common form of thin-film interference
involves oil and this molecule. This molecule has a bent geometry, a freezing point at 0 degrees Celsius,
and a boiling point at 100 degrees Celsius. For the point, name this substance with chemical formula H2O
[h-two-oh].
ANSWER: water (accept H2O before it is read)


(Tossup 7) The difference between this quantity’s forward and reverse forms equals the reaction heat. On
a reaction coordinate, this quantity is the difference between the maximum point and the curve’s value for
the reactants. Catalysts lower, for the point, what amount of energy which must be supplied to a system
for a reaction to occur?
ANSWER: activation energy [accept Ea; accept activation enthalpy)


(Tossup 8) This quantity is the analog of the work function for a single atom. Mulliken’s electronegativity
calculation is equal to the average of this quantity and electron affinity. This quantity is similar to electron
affinity and decreases as one moves to the bottom left of the periodic table. For the point, name this
quantity equal to the amount of energy required to strip an element of one electron to create a charged
species.
ANSWER: first ionization energy


(Tossup 9) To prevent excessive energy loss through heat, the current in electrical lines is typically
lowered while this quantity across the line is raised. Also defined as electromotive force or electric potential
difference, for the point, identify this quantity which is often about 1.5 in standard metric units for
double-A, triple-A, C, and D batteries, but is often about 9 for rectangular prism shaped batteries.
ANSWER: voltage (accept electromotive force; accept electric potential difference, do not accept
or prompt on volt)


(Tossup 10) Quasars may be highly energetic parts of these objects. The Hubble Ultra-Deep Field image
captured a picture with roughly 10,000 of these objects. Lenticular [len-tik-yu-ler] types of these objects
have properties intermediate between elliptical and spiral types of these objects. For the point, identify
these objects which include the dwarf Magellanic Clouds, the large Andromeda, and our own Milky Way.
ANSWER: Galaxy (accept galaxies)


(Tossup 11) An alloy of this element with lead is frequently used in manufacturing car batteries. A
namesake exchanger uses sodium to remove this element from cells, the presence of which allows for the
contraction of muscles. Though it’s not magnesium, this element is one of the primary components of
hard water. The carbonate of this element is used in antacid medication and found in limestone. For the
point, name this element essential for the function of teeth and bones with symbol Ca.
ANSWER: calcium (accept Ca before it is read)




                                                    Page 2
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                             Round 2


(Tossup 12) Carnelian, Citrine, [sit-reen] Jasper, and Agate are varieties of this mineral. The violet-purple
variety of this mineral is amethyst. This mineral has piezoelectric properties, and was the basis of the
many clocks and watches in the mid-20th century. This mineral’s basic chemical formula is silicon dioxide.
For the point, identify this mineral, which except for feldspar, is the most common mineral in Earth’s
crust.
ANSWER: Quartz


(Tossup 13) The derivative of this number to the x power is still this number to the x power. This value
is the base of the exponential term used to calculate continuously compounding interest. This value raised
to the product of pi and i equals -1, and it is approximated as 2.718. For the point, name this number, the
base of the natural logarithm.
ANSWER: e (accept Euler’s constant)


(Tossup 14) This process comes in “acid-base” and “redox” varieties. For poly-protic acids, the curve
plotted from this process will have multiple inflection points. Phenolphthalein [fee-nahl-fay-leen] can be
used as an indicator in this process. Burettes with stop cocks to control the flow into the flask are typically
used in this process. For the point, name this process of slowly adding a titrant to a solution of unknown
concentration.
ANSWER: titration


(Tossup 15) The oldest of these structures still in operation is Quatinah [kah-tee-nah] Barrage which,
around 1300 BC, created Lake Homs in Syria. One type of these is a “gravity” type in which the force
of gravity on this structure acts as a counterbalance to other forces, while those forces can be further
balanced by adding an arch design to these structures. For the point, identify these structures, of which
the Nurek in Tajikistan is the tallest, the Aswan High has the largest capacity, and among hydroelectric
types, the Three Gorges in China produces the most electricity.
ANSWER: dams


(Tossup 16) Defined as the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of one kilogram of water
by one degree Celsius, this quantity is approximately equal to four-point-two joules. A gram of protein or
a gram of carbohydrates has a value of four for this quantity, but a gram of fat has a value of nine. For
the point, name this unit of energy often found at the top of nutrition labels.
ANSWER: calories; accept kilocalories; accept food calories; accept small or large calories)


(Tossup 17) This substance emulsifies fat droplets when it is released into the duodenum of the
small intestine from its namesake duct. This substance, which contains 0.2% bilirubin, is stored in the
gallbladder. Bilirubin is partially responsible for the yellow-brown color of this digestive fluid. For the
point, name this fluid produced by the liver that aids in the digestion of lipids.
ANSWER: bile (accept gall before gallbladder is read)




                                                   Page 3
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                        Round 2


(Tossup 18) This process is inhibited by the hormone somatostatin. Once the epiphyseal plate closes, this
process likely ceases forever. The pineal gland releases GH to stimulate this process which occurs mostly
during sleep. Steroids can cause this process in muscles. For the point, name this process that is stunted
in people with dwarfism.
ANSWER: growth (or growing; accept word-forms and synonyms; accept muscle growth; do not accept
other forms of tissue growth)


(Tossup 19) Denial of the loss of this sense is known as Anton-Babinski syndrome. Arthropods use
ommatidia for this sense. This sense is controlled by the second cranial nerve and can deteriorate due to
macular degeneration. It is facilitated by rod and cone cells and can go cloudy for people with cataracts.
For the point, name this sense processed by the retina in the back of the eye.
ANSWER: sight (accept synonyms and word forms)


(Tossup 20) Sums of numbers in this object can be calculated with the hockey stick identity. By coloring
odd numbers in this object black, and even numbers white, one can create a fractal named for Sierpinski.
The sums of the rows of this object are powers of two and each number in this object is a binomial
coefficient. For the point, name this array of numbers named for a French mathematician in which each is
the sum of the two above it.
ANSWER: Pascal’s triangle


(Tossup 21) Precursors to this technology were developed by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of
the United States Department of Defense. The IETF is responsible for maintaining the standards of this
technology. ISPs provide this technology that Al Gore once called an “information super highway.” For
the point, name this system of interconnected computer networks that allows people to browse the web.
ANSWER: the Internet (accept interconnected network; prompt on world wide web; prompt on web)


(Tossup 22) The Buchner [bookh-ner] variety of this piece of lab equipment has a hose barb projecting
from its neck which can be used to attach a vacuum. The Florence variety of this lab equipment requires
a base to rest on since it is round bottomed. One of the more common types of this lab equipment is
flat bottomed and conically shaped. For the point, identify these pieces of glassware used for holding or
mixing chemicals, the most famous variety of which is named for its inventor, Emil Erlenmeyer.
ANSWER: Laboratory flasks


(Tossup 23) This scientist helped disprove spontaneous generation by using a swan-necked flask filled
with broth. This scientist developed vaccines for rabies and anthrax. He is best known for his work on
heating wines which was extended into his namesake process which increases the shelf life of perishable
foods by heating them up. For the point, name this French scientist who names a process of treating milk
to remove microorganisms.
ANSWER: Louis Pasteur (accept Pasteurization)




                                                 Page 4
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                            Round 2


(Tossup 24) The endoplasmic reticulum uses translocons to synthesize proteins that will be placed across
this structure. The motility of this structure is controlled by cholesterol and fatty acid tail length. This
structure is described by the “fluid-mosaic” model and consists of proteins embedded in a phospholipid
bilayer. For the point, name this semi-permeable membrane that surrounds the cell’s cytoplasm.
ANSWER: cell membrane (prompt on phospholipid bilayer; do not accept or prompt on cell wall)


(Tossup 25) Jelly-filled canals in these animals serve as electric field sensors and are called the Ampullae
of Lorenzini. These animals have a cartilaginous skeleton, and they must continue to swim due to a lack
of swim bladder to keep them afloat. These animals, noted for regenerating teeth, include the extinct
Megalodon. For the point, name these animals whose varieties include tiger, hammerhead, and great
white.
ANSWER: sharks (accept selachimorpha)


(Tossup 26) John Flamsteed thought this object was a new star when he first observed it, and William
Herschel first believed that this object was a comet. One theory suggests that this object was struck by
a large object early in its existence which not only caused this object to lose a great deal of its internal
heat, but also caused this object to tilt so that its axis is very close to being parallel to the plane of the
solar system. For the point, identify this planet which has moons that include Titania and Ariel, the 7th
planet from the sun.
ANSWER: Uranus


(Tossup 27) Early detectors of this type of radiation drew their power from the radiation as it was
modulated by a small diode made of crystalline galena. Unlike higher frequencies, very low frequencies
of this radiation can travel underwater for long distances. For the point, identify this type of radiation,
first generated artificially by Heinrich Hertz, and which consist of electromagnetic waves with frequencies
under 3 billion hertz and are used for radar and communications.
ANSWER: radio waves


(Tossup 28) Transport across this organelle’s basket shaped pore complexes is facilitated by exportins
and importins which move proteins with an NLS signal to the inside of this organelle. This organelle has
a double-membrane and is broken down at the beginning of mitosis. DNA polymerases are found in this
organelle. For the point, name this organelle that contains the nucleolus and houses the cell’s DNA.
ANSWER: nucleus


(Tossup 29) Electrolysis of water forms oxygen gas and this element’s gas, and a type of bond named for
this element causes compounds to have a higher boiling point because of intermolecular forces. One of its
isotopes is deuterium, and this element’s ion is equivalent to a proton. For the point, name this first and
lightest element on the periodic table with symbol H.
ANSWER: hydrogen (accept H before it is read)




                                                   Page 5
National Science Bee Regional 2 2018-2019                                                         Round 2


(Tossup 30) One of these features, named for the Philippines, runs 1320 kilometers from Luzon to
Halmahera. One of these features named for Puerto Rico runs about 800 kilometers and marks part of
the boundary between the Atlantic and Caribbean. These features appear at convergent plate boundaries
and mark the location where one plate subducts beneath another. For the point, identify these submarine
features, the most famous of which is located off the coast of the Mariana Islands and bottoms out at
Challenger Deep.
ANSWER: Oceanic trenches (accept submarine trench)


Replacements

(Tossup 31) The origin of this taxon is thought to have occurred due to endosymbiosis. The flagella of
members of this taxon have a nine plus two arrangement. The Latin name of this domain is “true kernel.”
Organisms in this domain can undergo meiosis to produce four haploid daughter cells, and this domain is
characterized by organelles and a nucleus. For the point, name this domain of life consisting of plants and
animals.
ANSWER: Eukaryotes (accept Eukaryota)

(Tossup 32) The father of modern taxonomy, Carl Linnaeus, was also known for inverting a scale used to
measure this quantity. This quantity was measured in units by William Thomson, who was the 1st Baron
Kelvin. For 10 points, what quantity was also measured by Anders Celsius and Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit?
ANSWER: temperature (prompt on heat)




                                                  Page 6
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                            Science Bee 2 - Round 3



Science Bee 2 - Round 3
Round 3 Tossups
(1)     Duffy antigen absence and thalassemia [[thah-lah-SEE-mee-uh]] traits convey
partial resistance to this disease. Drug resistant varieties of this disease are treated with
artemisinins [[ar-tih-MEE-sih-nins]]. This disease is most commonly spread by members of
the genus Anopheles [[uh-NAH-feh-lees]]. Carriers of sickle cell anemia possess a
heterozygous [[heh-ter-oh-ZAI-gus]] genetic resistance to this disease. This disease can be
treated with the drug quinine. For the point, name this mosquito-borne disease caused by
the Plasmodium parasite.

ANSWER: Malaria

(2)     The destructive type of this process is used for thermal cracking of coal to form coal
tar and coke. Refluxing can be used to improve the output of this process. Azeotropes [[AY-
zee-oh-tropes]] such as ethanol and water cannot be separated using the fractional form of
this technique. Selective condensation is used in, for the point, what technique which
separates mixtures based on differences in boiling point?

ANSWER: Distillation (accept Distilling; accept Destructive distillation; accept Fractional
distillation)

(3)    Roughly 300 miles thick, this region lies above a superheated core and a layer that
convects heat away from that core, causing it to reach temperatures in excess of 5000
degrees Celsius. That convection contributes to sunspots and solar flares in this layer of the
sun - what many would consider the visible “surface." For the point, identify this layer of the
sun which takes its name from the Greek word for "light."

ANSWER: Photosphere

(4)     In Einstein solids, which are composed of quantum harmonic oscillators, this
property is defined as the derivative of internal energy with respect to temperature at
constant volume. The molar [[MOH-lahr]] type of this property is modeled by the Dulong–
Petit [[PET-it]] law. Water has a high value for this property, leading to land and sea
breezes. For the point, name this property which gives the heat needed to raise the
temperature of a substance by one degree.

ANSWER: Heat capacity (or Specific heat; accept Molar heat capacity)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                          Science Bee 2 - Round 3


(5)     This mathematician’s “orchard” is derived from his algorithm that finds the greatest
common divisor. John Playfair names a statement that extends one of this mathematician’s
axioms which is violated by hyperbolic space. “All right angles are congruent” and “a
straight line segment can be drawn joining any two points” are two of five statements this
man postulated. For the point, name this Greek mathematician who wrote the Elements and
is considered the “father of geometry.”

ANSWER: Euclid (accept Euclid's orchard; accept Euclid's parallel postulate)

(6)      The V variant of this substance can be taken orally, while its G variant can only be
administered intravenously. This substance was discovered as a result of a crude extract of
P rubens, which was shown to kill a sample of staphylococcus aureus. For the point, name
this first commercial antibiotic, derived from a type of mold and accidentally discovered by
Alexander Fleming.

ANSWER: Penicillin (accept Penicillin VK; accept Phenoxymethylpenicillin; accept
Penicillin G; accept Benzylpenicillin; prompt on “Benpen”; prompt on “PcV”)

(7)     These numbers have the form "two to the p minus one times two to the quantity p
minus one," leading to their one-to-one correspondence with Mersenne primes. These
numbers are neither deficient nor abundant and are only known to be even. Examples of
these numbers include six, twenty-eight, and 496. For the point, name these numbers which
are the sum of their own prime factors.

ANSWER: Perfect numbers

(8)      A Pourbaix [[poor-BAY]] diagram plots this quantity on the x-axis and voltage on the
y-axis and can be used to evaluate corrosion. Phenolphthalein [[FEE-nahlf-THAY-leen]]
turns from colorless to pink as this quantity increases, leading to its use in titrations.
Hortensia can be blue or pink depending on this quantity for the soil. Buffers resist changes
to, for the point, what quantity which is contrasted with pKa and describes the acidity or
basicity of a substance.

ANSWER: pH [[PEE-AITCH]] scale

(9)    This man studied gardening and beekeeping as a child, but turned his focus to
philosophy and physics, studying under Christian Doppler. Unable to pass his oral exams to
become a teacher, the financial strain of his education led this man to join the Augustinian
abbey in Brno [[BUR-noh]]. Although he was a physics teacher, this man's background in
gardening had the greatest impact on his legacy. For the point, name this friar whose work
with pea plants established the science of genetics.

ANSWER: Gregor Mendel
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                          Science Bee 2 - Round 3


(10) The first model of this particle was proposed by Murray Gell-Mann and George
Zweig. Quantum chromodynamics describes the interaction of the strong force between
gluons and this subatomic particle. Hadrons are divided into two types depending on
whether they comprise two or three of these particles. Protons and neutrons are composed
of "up" and "down" varieties of these particles which come in six "flavors." For the point,
name this subatomic particle.

ANSWER: Quarks (accept Quark model; accept Up quarks; accept U quarks; accept Down
quarks; accept D quarks)

(11) Morris Ketchum Jesup provided funding for this man's mobile classrooms, called
Jesup Wagons. When the U.S. was undercut by imports from China, this man testified to the
Ways and Means Committee in 1921. This man studied restoration of nitrogen via crop
rotation to improve cotton planting and was called the "Black Leonardo." Teaching at
Tuskegee Institute, for the point, who was this African-American agricultural scientist who
studied the use of peanuts.

ANSWER: George Washington Carver

(12) Unhealthy growth of these organisms on water surfaces can be the result of
eutrophication, a process often caused by human waste discharge. Cyanobacteria is often
called a blue-green variant of this organism. This type of organism is used to make a
gelatinous substance called agar [[AY-gar]], while other types can be eaten as nori. For the
point, name these photosynthetic protists which include types like the giant kelp.

ANSWER: Algae (accept Blue-green algae; accept Red algae; prompt on “seaweed(s)”;
prompt on “kelp”)

(13) In one type of these events, a “rebound” and “bounce” can lead to “core collapse.” A
flood of neutrinos may be the result of one of these events. When a white dwarf exceeds 1.4
solar masses, or the Chandrasekhar [[chahn-drah-SEH-kar]] limit, one type of these events
used as a standard candle called “one a” will occur. One of these events seen in 1054 created
the Crab Nebula. For the point, name these events in which a star explodes.

ANSWER: Supernovae (or Supernovas in place of Supernovae; accept Type II
supernovae; accept Type IA supernovae; prompt on "SN or "SNe")

(14) S, I, A, and M are classifications of this type of rock devised by Chappell and White.
The QAPF classification characterizes the components of these rocks. Yosemite National
Park's Half Dome is made of this type of rock, which is similar to diorite. Rhyolite is the
extrusive equivalent of this type of rock. For the point, name this type of coarse-grained
rock which is the main component of continental crust and is often pink, white, or black
when used in countertops.

ANSWER: Granite
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                         Science Bee 2 - Round 3


(15) Under the Georgi-Glashow model, this letter designates bosons responsible for
proton decay. A satellite communications spectrum band named for this letter falls between
eight and twelve gigahertz. This letter can represent any halogen in organic chemistry
reactions, and the genes causing hemophilia and colorblindness are carried on a
chromosome of this letter. Wilhelm Röntgen [[RENT-gun]] could view bones using rays
labeled with, for the point, what letter which resembles the multiplication sign?

ANSWER: X (accept X boson(s); accept X band; accept X chromosome(s); accept X-ray(s))

(16) In 2005, the Lasco worm used Symbian OS and this technology to spread. RuBee is
touted as a safer alternative to this technology which once competed against the IEEE
802.11 protocol. This technology spread rapidly after the introduction of Secure Simple
Pairing, and unlike IR, this tech does not require a line of sight to connect. Developed by
Ericsson, for the point, what is this technology for wirelessly networking consumer
electronics, named for a 10th century Danish king?

ANSWER: Bluetooth

(17) The "fuming" form of this compound is also known as oleum. A vanadium [[vah-
NAY-dee-um]] pentoxide catalyst is used in the production of this compound in the contact
process, which has largely supplanted the lead chamber process. This compound is used in
lead acid batteries, and clouds on Venus have a high percentage of droplets of this
compound, which is found with nitric acid in acid rain. For the point, name this strong,
diprotic [[dai-PRAH-tik]] acid with chemical formula H2SO4.

ANSWER: Sulfuric acid (accept H2SO4 before mentioned; accept Fuming sulfuric acid;
accept Oil of vitriol)

(18) 'Narrow-spectrum' types of these substances such as sarecycline target specific
biological cells. Prontosil was the first active example of these substances. Carbapenem and
cephalosporins are examples of a beta-lactam type of these substances. Bacteria that exhibit
an abnormally strong resistance to these substances are called "Superbugs." For the point,
name these substances widely used to treat bacterial infections.

ANSWER: Antibiotics (accept Narrow-spectrum antibiotics; acet Beta-lactam antibiotics)

(19) The two main types of these things are surface and deep-water. A riptide is not a
tide but one of these things. Thermohaline [[ther-moh-HAY-leen]] circulation drives some
of these entities, and rotating systems of these things make up gyres. One of these things
first mapped by Timothy Folger and Benjamin Franklin is called the Gulf Stream. For the
point, name these moving systems of water in the oceans.

ANSWER: Ocean currents (accept Surface currents; accept Deep-water currents)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                         Science Bee 2 - Round 3


(20) A mariachi band played when the final example of these objects was produced in
2003 at a Puebla, Mexico factory. The Cal looker was a modified variant of this object which
Béla Barényi engineered. Ivan Hirst helped open a factory for these vehicles which were
made under Heinz Nordhoff's leadership. This car was called the "People's Car," and it was
born from the ideas of Adolf Hitler and Ferdinand Porsche. For the point, name this
distinctively-shaped Volkswagen car.

ANSWER: Volkswagen Beetle (accept Volkswagen Type 1; accept Bug in place of Beetle;
accept Volkswagen Käfer)

(21) One long-running show on this television channel raised controversy by refusing to
air an episode on RFID credit card security, while having tripled the available data on
bullets shot straight up. This channel replaced narrator David Attenborough with Sigourney
Weaver when it aired Planet Earth, and its award-winning series Walking with Dinosaurs is
still the most expensive TV documentary. Shark Week is an annual tradition on, for the
point, which cable TV channel, home of the MythBusters?

ANSWER: The Discovery Channel

(22) Urbain Le Verrier hypothesized this body which Percival Lowell called "Planet X."
11-year old Venetia Burney named this body which Clyde Tombaugh used a blink
comparator to find. The IAU launched a debate on whether this body was properly
categorized. This body has moons named Styx, Nix, Kerberos, and Charon [[KAY-run]], and
New Horizons did a flyby of this dwarf planet in the Kuiper Belt. For the point, name this
former ninth planet of the solar system.

ANSWER: 134340 Pluto

(23) If this mission had failed, Richard Nixon would have read the "Fate Has Ordained…"
speech. Michael Collins was selected to remain in the orbiting Command Module during this
mission which involved landing the Eagle at Tranquility Base. During this mission, one
astronaut stated "that's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind." For the point,
name this NASA mission during which Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong walked on the Moon.

ANSWER: Apollo 11 (prompt on "Apollo"; prompt on answers mentioning landing on the
moon but not giving the specific mission)

(24) Through 2020, more Boy Scout merit badges have been earned for learning this
practice than any other. The ABC protocol assesses if a person needs one form of this
practice. Applying a tourniquet and performing the Heimlich maneuver are vital skills of
this treatment, for which the Red Cross awards certification. Rescue breathing and CPR are
components of, for the point, what form of immediate medical assistance which may use the
dressings and bandages in a namesake kit?

ANSWER: First aid (accept CPR before mentioned' anti-prompt on “stopping bleeding,”
“stopping choking,” and similar specific answers)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                            Science Bee 2 - Round 3


(25) These animals' livers have enough vitamin A in them to kill over 50 adult humans.
These animals' hollow, clear fur and black skin insulates heat so well that they appear
invisible on thermal imaging. According to legend, Inuit people learned to hunt seals by
watching these animals, which are the largest land carnivores. For the point, name these
large, white bears which live in the Arctic.

ANSWER: Polar bear(s) (or Ursus maritimus)

(26) An increase in pressure can increase the value of this property. An increase in
temperature can decrease the value of this property, but the variation is slight for solids and
liquids. Also known as specific mass, this property is measured in kilograms per cubic meter
and relates to an object’s buoyancy. For the point, what is this property which is determined
by dividing an object’s mass by its volume?

ANSWER: Volumetric mass density (accept Specific mass before mentioned)

(27) This quantity reaches its highest values in solids, due to the formation of a shear
wave. Prandtl–Glauert [[PRAHN-tuhl GLAO-ert]] singularities were previously believed to
form when this quantity was exceeded. At normal temperatures, this quantity is
approximately 343 meters per second in air. The ratio of an object's velocity to this quantity
is known as the Mach number. For the point, a "sonic boom" may be caused when exceeding
what quantity?

ANSWER: Speed of sound (accept Mach 1 before mentioned; prompt on "sound barrier")

(28) Extinct groups in this family include the Hesperocyoninae [[heh-speh-roh-sai-OH-
nih-nay]] and Borophaginae [[boh-roh-FADJ-ih-nay]]. One member of this family from south
and southeast Asia is the dhole [[DOHL]]. Another member of this family that is endemic to
Japan is the tanuki. Wild members of this family include jackals and dingos. For the point,
name this family of mammals which includes foxes, coyotes, and wolves.

ANSWER: Canidae (or Canids; accept Canines; prompt on "Dog(s)")

(29) Fulgurites are glassy structures formed from these phenomena, which may also
cause Lichtenberg [[LIK-ten-berg]] figures. The “ball” type of this phenomenon is still
unexplained, and St. Elmo's fire may be indicative of one of these phenomena. Benjamin
Franklin may have used a kite to determine that these phenomena are electric. For the
point, name this electrical phenomenon which often appears as "cloud to ground."

ANSWER: Lightning (prompt on "electricity"; accept Ball lightning; accept Cloud-to-ground
lightning; accept CG lightning)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                         Science Bee 2 - Round 3


(30) Subsurface oceans of this molecule exist on Ganymede, Enceladus [[en-keh-LAH-
dus]], and Europa, and it exists in liquid form in the Goldilocks zone. In 2015, NASA
confirmed evidence of this molecule in Martian perchlorate salts, and it is found under the
carbon dioxide ice cap at Mars’s south pole. Along with rocks and dust, the frozen form of
this molecule makes up comets. For the point, name this substance thought to be required
for alien life since it covers about 70% of the Earth’s surface.

ANSWER: Water (or H-2-O; accept Water vapor or Water ice)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                         Science Bee 2 - Round 3


Extra Question
(1)      This phenomenon was the subject of the Cavendish experiment, which was the first
to yield an accurate value for a physical constant used in a calculation involving Newton's
universal law of this phenomenon. Galileo dropped balls from the Leaning Tower of Pisa,
showing that acceleration due to this phenomenon is the same for all objects. For the point,
name this force of attraction between masses governed by Einstein's theory of general
relativity.

ANSWER: Gravity (or Gravitation)
2020-21 Science Bee 2 - 2021-03-29                                                     Extra Questions



Extra Questions
Extra Questions
(1)     The phlogiston [[FLAH-jih-stun]] theory was debunked following discoveries about
the role of this element in combustion. Chlorofluorocarbons have damaged a layer of the
Earth's atmosphere comprised of an allotrope of this element. That allotrope, ozone, is
made up of three instead of two atoms of this element. For the point, name this gas which
comprises about 20% of the Earth's atmosphere and is necessary for aerobic respiration.

ANSWER: Oxygen (accept O)

(2)     The “order” of these features can be determined using Horton or Strahler’s method.
Buffers around these objects are called riparian zones. The meandering type of these
objects can be cut off to form oxbows. Deltas of sediment form at the “mouths” of these
objects, and the term "tributary" is used for these things which flow into larger examples of
these things. The Nile and Amazon exemplify, for the point, what moving bodies of water?

ANSWER: Rivers (accept Streams in place of Rivers; accept Strahler(‘s) stream order;
accept Horton(‘s) stream order; accept Meandering rivers)

(3)     These regions can be home to a magnesium rich "varnish" that covers exposed
rocks. Plantations of Jojoba [[hoh-HOH-bah]] trees have been used in India to stop the
expansion of these places. Isolated fertile areas in these locations are called oases, and these
places can form as a result of a rain shadow from mountain ranges. The Atacama and Sahara
are examples of, for the point, what regions which experience little rainfall?

ANSWER: Deserts

(4)     Failure to cook this food in an alkaline solution via nixtamalization caused frequent
pellagra epidemics among European settlers. This crop was first domesticated from teosinte
in the Balsas River region and has been found in the Guilá Naquitz [[gwee-LAH nah-KEETS]]
Cave in the Oaxaca [[wah-HAH-kah]] Valley. With squash and beans, this crop formed the
Three Sisters. For the point, name this crop used in a certain high fructose syrup.

ANSWER: Maize (accept Corn)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                         Round 1



Round 1
Before Round 1 - please use these Practice Questions for the students to practice with the
buzzers! These questions do NOT count towards scoring for the round.

Practice Question A - The Hylonomous was the earliest known member of this class,
which split off from birds around 65 million years ago. Members of this class of animal
are cold-blooded and usually covered in scutes or scales. For the point, name this class of
animals that includes turtles, lizards, and snakes.

ANSWER: Reptiles (or Reptilia)

Practice Question B - According to ancient Greek-Egyptian scientist Ptolomy, this object
was the center of the universe. This object’s only moon likely occurred when another
object, Theia, collided with this planet. For the point, name this third planet from the sun,
where we are right now.

ANSWER: Earth (prompt on “Geocentric Model” or “Geocentricity”)

Practice Question C - The pistil and stamen are found within this structure, which also
include sporangia for the distribution of spores. The only plants that possess these objects
are angiosperms. For the point, name these colorful reproductive structures of certain
plants, also called blossoms.

ANSWER: Flowers (accept Blooms; accept Blossoms before mentioned)

Once you have finished with the practice questions, make sure all of the students in the
room understand how the round will work and then proceed as usual. Remember, these
do NOT count towards any scores for the round!
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                            Round 1


Regulation Tossups
(1)     It's not Aquarius, but a meteor shower named for this constellation is produced by
Halley’s comet. A feature in this constellation is formed by the stars Alnitak, Alnilam, and
Mintaka, and this constellation’s brightest stars are Rigel and Betelgeuse. A mythological
hunter names, for the point, what constellation with a famous belt?

ANSWER: Orion

(2)      This molecule is rapidly copied in the lab technique PCR, and the enzyme helicase
splits this molecule before it is replicated by a polymerase. This molecule contains adenine,
cytosine, guanine, and thymine. For the point, name this double-helix structure that contains
genetic information.

ANSWER: DNA (accept Deoxyribonucleic Acid)

(3)     The warming effect of this natural phenomenon has increased the biodiversity of
areas like Nantucket. The Antilles Current connects with this phenomenon at the intersection
of the Florida Strait. For the point, name this warm ocean current that originates in the
southern US and makes its way along the eastern coastline through the North Atlantic.

ANSWER: Gulf Stream

(4)     These animals were hypothesized to be juvenile examples of the Torosaurus. These
animals' two species were the horridus and prorsus, and these animals were first thought to
be an extinct type of bison. The Tyrannosaurus rex was likely the primary predator of, for the
point, what dinosaurs that may have defended themselves with their three horns?

ANSWER: Triceratops

(5)     Two of these particles behave as a boson in a Cooper pair, and these particles name
the most stable flavor of neutrino. These particles and stable leptons possess antiparticles
called positrons, and these particles are the quanta and force carrier of the electromagnetic
force. For the point, name these negatively charged particles that orbit the nucleus of an atom.

ANSWER: Electrons

(6)      This quantity is proportional to temperature, but inversely proportional to pressure
from the combined gas law. This quantity has a value of 22.4 for one mole of an ideal gas. For
the point, name this quantity describing the space occupied by a substance, usually expressed
in liters.

ANSWER: Volume
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                              Round 1


(7)      Elevated levels of free fatty acids are a risk factor for resistance to this hormone. The
effect of this hormone is opposed by glucagon, and this hormone is released by beta cells in
the islets of Langerhans of the pancreas. For the point, name this hormone involved in blood
sugar modulation, which is often taken by people with type 1 diabetes.

ANSWER: Insulin

(8)      AFFF and CAFS are compounds used for this task that are usually manifested as foam.
Portable devices used for this task most commonly contain compressed CO2 and dry ABC
powder. Extinguishers and water are used in, for the point, what task commonly performed
by first responders using a hose?

ANSWER: Fire Fighting (accept any answer regarding Putting Out or Extinguishing Fires)

(9)     These devices can include a light-blocking component called a coronagraph, and
protesters on Mauna Kea are trying to prevent a Thirty-Meter one of these devices from being
built. NASA administrator James Webb is a namesake of, for the point, what type of devices,
the most famous of which is named for Edwin Hubble?

ANSWER: Telescopes (accept Space Telescopes)

(10) This desert is the alleged home of a "Death Worm," which may be the Tartar sand boa.
This desert was formed by the rain shadow of the Tibetan Plateau, and it is the native habitat
of the Bactrian camel. China constructed a "Green Wall" to contain, for the point, what large
Asian desert that covers southern Mongolia?

ANSWER: Gobi Desert

(11) A procedure known as CABG [["Cabbage"]] is used to remove blockages in these
structures. Most of these structures carry oxygenated blood, and the largest one of these
structures is the aorta. A person's pulse can be detected by feeling, for the point, what blood
vessels that carry blood away from the heart?

ANSWER: Arteries (or Artery)

(12) A specific class of these compounds is named for Gilbert Lewis. The Bronsted-Lowry
definition of these compounds involves the donation of hydrogen ions in solution. The acetic
form of these compounds is found in vinegar. For the point, name these compounds which
exhibit a pH below 7, contrasted with bases.

ANSWER: Acids (accept Superacid; accept Lewis Acid)

(13) The Bessemer process removes impurities from this element's "Pig" form. With cobalt
and nickel, this element is naturally ferromagnetic, and this element oxidizes to form a red
compound called rust. For the point, name this transition metal with symbol Fe [[F-E]] that
alloys with carbon to make steel.

ANSWER: Iron (or Fe)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                           Round 1


(14) The genome of this organism was completely sequenced in 2000, and the white-eyed
mutation of this organism is often studied in introductory biology classes. This organism was
used by Thomas Hunt Morgan to study heredity and sex-linked traits. For the point, name this
common insect and model organism.

ANSWER: Fruit Fly (or Drosophila melanogaster)

(15) The strong form of this concept is refuted in the Chinese room argument. A test for
this concept evaluating indistinguishability from human conversation is named for Alan
Turing. For the point, name this concept that refers to a computer's ability to think like a
human brain.

ANSWER: Artificial Intelligence (or A.I.)

(16) Use of this material must be halved by 2030 to meet the criteria of the Paris
Agreement. Satellites like Sentinel-5P monitor this material's sulfur dioxide output, and
varieties of this material include lignite and anthracite. For the point, name this fuel source
composed mostly of solid carbon.

ANSWER: Coal (accept Lignite or Anthracite before mentioned; prompt on "Fossil Fuels")

(17) Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing is a therapy developed for this
condition that was formerly known as shell shock. Flashbacks and recurring nightmares are
characteristic symptoms of this condition. For the point, name this psychological condition
caused by experiencing horrible events, commonly associated with soldiers.

ANSWER: PTSD (or Post-traumatic Stress Disorder; prompt on "Shell Shock" before
mentioned)

(18) Primary examples of these compounds are oxidized to aldehydes and carboxylic
acids, while secondary types are oxidized to ketones. These compounds are characterized by
the presence of a hydroxyl group. Methanol and ethanol are the simplest members of, for the
point, what class of compounds found in beer and liquor.

ANSWER: Alcohols (accept Primary Alcohol or Secondary Alcohol; prompt on specific
molecules like “Methanol” or “Ethanol;” prompt on “Hydroxyl”)

(19) These cells are coated with a myelin sheath, which allows them to quickly transmit
action potentials. These cells are split into "sensory" and "motor" types and separated from
each other by synapses. For the point, name these signal-transmitting nerve cells, the basic
units of the nervous system.

ANSWER: Neurons (accept Nerve Cells)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                           Round 1


(20) The core collapse type of these events occurs when stars accumulate extremely
massive iron cores. Thermal runaways can be seen in the type 1a form of these events that
occur when a white dwarf surpasses the Chandrasekhar [[SHON-druh-say-karr]] limit. For
the point, name these extraordinary large stellar explosions.

ANSWER: Supernova (do not accept or prompt on just "Nova")

(21) These expressions are classified as analytic because they are a finite power series.
The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra states that every one of these expressions with degree
n and complex coefficients has n complex roots. For the point, name these expressions that
contain coefficients and variables, like x squared minus one.

ANSWER: Polynomials (prompt on “Quadratic” by asking “What larger class do quadratics
belong to?”)

(22) This entity “floats” on top of a lower layer when subject to isostasy [[EYE-soss-tuh-
see]]. This layer's most abundant elements by weight are oxygen and silicon. The boundary
between this layer of the Earth and the mantle is known as the Moho discontinuity. For the
point, name this outermost layer of the Earth.

ANSWER: Crust (accept Oceanic crust or Continental crust before mentioned; prompt on
“Lithosphere” by asking “What part?”)

(23) A paper by this scientist proposed a new calculation for mean squared displacement
of particles. That paper on Brownian motion and another on mass-energy equivalence were
half of this man's 1905 "Annus Mirabilis." For the point, name this scientist who, in that same
year, published explanations of the photoelectric effect and special relativity.

ANSWER: Albert Einstein

(24) Unlike addition, this operation is not commutative for matrices in general. The use of
numerous instances of this operation upon one number is called exponentiation. Often
thought of as a form of repeated addition, this is, for the point, what operation that when
applied to 2 and 3 yields 6?

ANSWER: Multiplication

(25) Fat is stored in the subcutaneous layer of this organ that makes up the integumentary
system. Exocrine glands secrete an oily substance called sebum to lubricate this organ, which
is the largest in the human body. Th dermis and epidermis are layers of, for the point, what
organ affected by eczema and acne?

ANSWER: Skin (accept Dermis before mentioned; accept Epidermis before mentioned)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                          Round 1


(26) The rotary form of this process is used to purify substances. This process explains
why sweating cools the body, and salt deposits are created when it occurs in saline water.
When this process occurs at low pressures or high temperatures, it is called boiling. For the
point, name this process in which a liquid turns into a gas.

ANSWER: Evaporation (or Vaporization; accept Boiling before mentioned)

(27) One of these devices was codenamed D1, and was deployed at Flers-Courcelette
[[FLEHRS CORE-suh-lett]] in France. The Soviet T-34 type of these devices was first deployed
against the invading Germans in World War Two. The Battle of El Alamein debuted of one of
these devices with a fully rotating gun turret. The M4 Sherman was one type of, for the point,
what heavily armored military vehicles?

ANSWER: Tanks (accept British Mark I; or Male Tanks; or T-34 Tanks; or M4 Sherman
Tanks)

(28) One form of this element is named after Buckminster Fuller, while another form of
this element ranks at the top of the Mohs hardness scale. Graphite is a form of this element,
which together with oxygen and hydrogen forms molecules of glucose. For the point, name
this element, the fundamental basis of organic molecules and life.

ANSWER: Carbon (or C)

(29) Mary Anning collected these objects in Lyme Regis. Types of these objects include
coprolites, and an arrangement of these objects comprise "Sue" at Chicago’s Field Museum.
Iguanodon and Diplodocus were identified after discovering, for the point, what objects dug
up by paleontologists?

ANSWER: Fossils (accept Dinosaur Bones)

(30) An unnamed ring of this planet parallels the orbit of its moon Galatea. Objects in a 1:2
resonance with this planet are known as “twotinos,” and a spinning storm on this planet is
known as the Great Dark Spot. Triton is a moon of, for the point, what planet in the solar
system, located farthest from the Sun?

ANSWER: Neptune
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                          Round 1


Extra Questions
(1)     The earliest estimate of this quantity depended on indirect estimates of the number
of particles of latex. Jean Perrin defined this constant, denoted capital N, as the number of
atoms in 16 grams of oxygen. For the point, name this constant, approximately 6 times 10 to
the 23rd power, that equals the number of particles in a mole.

ANSWER: Avogadro's Constant (or Avogadro's Number; prompt on "N" before mentioned)

(2)     The product of the linear dimension and flow speed is divided by this quantity to give
the Reynolds number. This quantity's kinematic form is equal to its dynamic form divided by
the density of the fluid. For the point, name this quantity, a measure of a fluid's internal
resistance to flow.

ANSWER: Viscosity
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                            Round 2



Round 2
Regulation Tossups
(1)     The second part of this process begins with a carbon dioxide molecule combining
with RuBP to make a high-energy intermediate. Deciduous trees such as birches and maples
perform this process using an organelle known as the chloroplast. Chlorophyll molecules
absorb light in, for the point, what process in which plants use light energy to produce sugars?

ANSWER: Photosynthesis (accept Light Reactions or Light-dependent Reactions before
“Second Part” is mentioned; prompt after mentioned; prompt on “Calvin Cycle” or “Calvin-
Benson Cycle” or “Dark Reaction”)

(2)     These objects from from precursor stars that exceed the Tolman-Oppenheimer-
Volkoff limit. The Reissner-Nordstrom variety of these objects are non-rotating, and one of
these objects is predicted to vanish, as described by Hawking radiation. For the point, name
these regions of supermassive gravity from which light cannot escape.

ANSWER: Black Holes (accept Reissner-Nordstrom Black Holes)

(3)     This man invented a mercury-fulminate-based blasting cap to reduce the need for
fuses. This owner of the arms manufacturer Bofors developed the use of nitroglycerin as an
active ingredient in explosives. For the point, name this Swedish chemist and inventor of
dynamite who lends his name to annual prizes awarded for literature, peace, and science.

ANSWER: Alfred Bernhard Nobel

(4)     A volcano plot depicts how these substances bind according to the Sabatier principle.
The number of active sites in the heterogenous type of these substances are lowered by
"Poisoning," and these substances provide an alternate reaction pathway by stabilizing the
transition state and lowering the activation energy. For the point, name these substances that
speed up chemical reactions.

ANSWER: Catalysts (accept Heterogeneous Catalysts)

(5)     When cooled to the lambda point, this element forms a superfluid Rollin film that
appears to creep out of its container. Alpha particles are the nuclei of this element, which is
the second-most abundant in the universe. Two hydrogen atoms combine to form, for the
point, what lightest noble gas that makes balloons float?

ANSWER: Helium or (He)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                               Round 2


(6)      This function appears three times in the formula for combinations, and it is estimated
by Stirling’s approximation. This function applied to 3 is 6, and when applied to 4 yields 24.
Defined as the product of all positive integers less than or equal to n, for the point, this is what
function denoted by an exclamation point?

ANSWER: Factorial

(7)     This organelle’s semi-permeable structure allows smaller molecules to pass through
without assistance through either osmosis or diffusion. Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
contain this organelle in a phospholipid bilayer form. For the point, name this organelle, the
cellular boundary that protects the inner organelles.

ANSWER: Cell Membrane (prompt on "Membrane" alone)

(8)     A "tree" variant of this animal is native to New Guinea, and that variety is the only
true arboreal macropod. Osphranter is a genus containing these animals, and that genus
contains the red species of this large mammal. For the point, name this Australian marsupial
and relative of the smaller wallaby.

ANSWER: Kangaroo (accept Kangaroo Island; accept Tree-Kangaroo)

(9)     This planet's atmosphere is composed of extremely thick clouds primarily made of
sulfuric acid. That thick atmosphere traps greenhouse gases, giving this planet the hottest
surface temperature in the solar system. For the point, identify this second planet from the
sun, sometimes called "Earth's Twin."

ANSWER: Venus

(10) The newly discovered element Oganesson is considered to be part of this group. This
group’s members are characterized by a full complement of valence electrons in their outer
shell, leading to their lower likelihood of taking part in a chemical reaction. For the point,
name this group of elements that contains helium, neon and argon.

ANSWER: Noble Gases (accept Inert Gases; accept Aerogens)

(11) The Quechua [[keh-CHWAH]] used the Cinchona [[SIN-chone-uh]] tree to fight this
disease. An outbreak of this disease led to the founding of the CDC, and this disease was
effectively ended in the U.S. by the introduction of DDT. American soldiers in the South Pacific
contracted, for the point, what disease that is spread by mosquitoes and named for the
Spanish for "Bad Air?"

ANSWER: Malaria
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                           Round 2


(12) Predecessors of these entities included Wingdings. A set of these entities would later
be introduced and constantly added using the Unicode standard, and a face with tears of joy
is the most popular one of these entities. For the point, name these pictograms often used in
text messages that include a host of facial expressions and objects.

ANSWER: Emojis

(13) William Jenney constructed some of these things using the "Chicago skeleton"
method, employing curtain walls over a steel frame. Early examples of these places include
one named for Equitable Life in New York and Louis Sullivan's example named for Ellis
Wainwright in St. Louis. The invention of the safety elevator enabled an 1890s boom in, for
the point, what very tall office buildings?

ANSWER: Skyscrapers

(14) One inequality named for this figure is reversed in Minkowski space. The intersection
of altitudes in this shape is known as its orthocenter, and its area can be computed using
Heron’s formula. The angles in any example of this polygon sum to 180 degrees in Euclidean
[[yoo-KLIH-dee-un]] space. For the point, name this polygon with three sides.

ANSWER: Triangle

(15) The deadliest instance of this phenomenon affected the cities of Daulatpua and
Saturia in Bangladesh. These phenomena that can form from supercells are measured by their
intensity on the Fujita scale. Waterspouts are aquatic versions of, for the point, what
devastating natural disasters of revolving air columns?

ANSWER: Tornado (accept equivalents such as Twisters; accept Cyclones)

(16) Pedology is the scientific field concerned with the formation of this material that is
grouped into layers called horizons. Along with water and gases, this material is primarily
composed of sand, silt, and clay. For the point, identify this nutrient-rich mixture of organic
material used to plant flowers and crops.

ANSWER: Soil (prompt on "Earth" or "Dirt")

(17) Algeria has constructed a dam named for this color to halt overgrazing, and engineers
in several African countries are constructing a Great Wall of this color to contain the Sahara
Desert. Along with red, this color names a type of colorblindness that is more prevalent in
males. For the point, name this color that identifies a type of beryl known as emerald.

ANSWER: Green
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                            Round 2


(18) This technique’s first description in Ancient India was found in the Bower Manuscript,
which also mentioned Sushruta [[SOO-shroo-tuh]], the “Father of [this procedure].” The
Edwin Smith Papyrus describes procedures for this practice in Ancient Egypt, including the
use of sutures. For the point, name this invasive medical technique that uses instruments to
treat a patient’s condition.

ANSWER: Surgery (accept descriptive answers regarding specific Surgical Procedures)

(19) This substance induces dysentery in its creators when produced from an aphid
byproduct. This substance's low moisture content makes it inhospitable to microorganisms,
which makes it the only known foodstuff to never spoil. Produced from stomach enzymes and
stored in hexagonal wax combs, this is, for the point, what natural sweetener produced from
nectar by bees?

ANSWER: Honey

(20) These biomes are the predominant environment in which the European chamois
[[sham-WAH]] goat-antelope is found. The pika is a close relative of the rabbit that can be
found in these biomes that also contain South American camelids such as guanacos and
vicuñas. Plant-life typically stops above the snow line in, for the point, what high-altitude
biomes that include the Himalayas?

ANSWER: Mountains (accept Alpine; accept Mountain Range; accept Highlands; accept
Himalayan Mountains)

(21) Plumes of this region are believed to cause volcanic hot spots. The highly ductile
upper portion of this region is known as the asthenosphere, and conductions in the semi-
liquid portions of this region cause the movement of tectonic plates. For the point, name this
region of the Earth located between the inner core and the crust.

ANSWER: Mantle

(22) Extant varieties of these animals include the screaming hairy and pink fairy types. In
the southern United States, the nine-banded variety of these animals always give birth to
identical quadruplets, and that species is the primary vector for leprosy. For the point, name
these armored mammals, some of which can roll into a ball when scared.

ANSWER: Armadillos

(23) Half of this object was first directly seen by Jim Lovell and two other crewmembers.
This site of the Sea of Tranquility was first visited when Michael Collins stayed in orbit while
his two colleagues used a module known as The Eagle. In 1969, Buzz Aldrin and Neal
Armstrong became the first two people to reach, for the point, what heavenly body?

ANSWER: The Moon (accept Luna)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                          Round 2


(24) This compound can be artificially synthesized using dimethylurea and malonic acid.
With theophylline, this compound is often used as a treatment for sleep apnea, and this
stimulant is an alkaloid and adenosine antagonist commonly used to prevent drowsiness. For
the point, name this stimulant found in tea and coffee.

ANSWER: Caffeine (accept Guaranine; accept Methyltheobromine)

(25) A possible test of this technology was known as the Vela Incident. Tests of this
technology include Smiling Buddha and Castle Bravo, and the presence of these weapons in
Cuba triggered a 1962 diplomatic crisis. For the point, name this military weapon that uses a
fission reaction to create an explosion.

ANSWER: Nuclear Weapons (accept reasonable equivalents, like Nukes; accept equivalents
mentioning the Atom Bomb or A-Bomb; accept Nuclear Warheads; prompt on "Weapons
of Mass Destruction;")

(26) Kepler’s conjecture concerns the packing of these figures in three-dimensional space,
and the sum of angles of a triangle on this shape exceeds 180 degrees. The surface area of one
of these objects is 4 pi r squared. For the point, name this 3D shape with a volume of four
thirds pi r cubed, exemplified by structures such as marbles and globes.

ANSWER: Sphere (accept Spherical; accept Spherical Harmonics; accept Spherical
Triangle)

(27) The largest unit of this measurement is a yotta, although a bronto has been proposed.
This computer component is supported by secondary forms, including cards, external hard
drives, and the Cloud. For the point, identify this computer component that comes in Random
Access and Read-Only types.

ANSWER: Memory (accept Random Access Memory or Read-Only Memory before
mentioned)

(28) The largest unit of this measurement is a yotta, although a bronto has been proposed.
This computer component is supported by secondary forms, including cards, external hard
drives, and the Cloud. For the point, identify this computer component that comes in Random
Access and Read-Only types.

ANSWER: Memory (accept Random Access Memory or Read-Only Memory before
mentioned)

(29) Lichens consist of a fungus and one of these organisms living in a symbiotic
relationship. Ocean afforestation involves growing these organisms en masse, and rapid
oxygen-depletion in the population of these organisms are known as their namesake
“blooms.” Cyanobacteria and seaweed are types of, for the point, what often green marine
protist organisms that float on water?

ANSWER: Algae (accept Blue-Green Algae; accept Seaweed)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                           Round 2


(30) The Vaccinia virus is used to inoculate against this disease that was once harvested
from the hands of milkmaids. British and American forces used this disease as a bioweapon
via contaminated blankets, and the world's first vaccines were produced by Edward Jenner
to prevent this disease. For the point, name this disease caused by Variola viruses, which was
eradicated in the 1970s.

ANSWER: Smallpox (prompt on "Variola Major" or "Variola Minor" before mentioned)

Extra Questions
(1)     This force can be found by taking the product of its direction with the dot product of
the unit vector and the Cauchy [[CO-chee]] stress tensor. For a ramp with an angle of
inclination theta, the magnitude of this force is equal to mg cosine theta. This force prevents
a book perched on a table from sinking through it. For the point, name this force produced by
a contact surface perpendicular to itself.

ANSWER: Normal Force

(2)     This task commonly uses clay in the K-AR technique. Another technique for this task
uses zircon to calculate a uranium-thorium-lead decay chain, and another method for this
task uses the 12 and 14 isotopes of carbon. For the point, name this process that uses
radioactive decay to find the age of an object.

ANSWER: Radiometric Dating (accept Radiocarbon Dating; accept Carbon Dating; accept
Uranium-Lead Dating; accept descriptive terms referring to finding a Date or an Age of an
object)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                            Round 3



Round 3
Regulation Tossups
(1)     A 1999 mission to study the climate of this body was lost due to a miscommunication
regarding Imperial and metric units. Extensive soil tests were performed on this body by the
Viking landers. The Spirit and Opportunity rovers transmitted extensive data from, for the
point, what fourth planet from the sun?

ANSWER: Mars

(2)     These phenomena are the most common disorders treated with split-brain
procedures. The febrile type of these phenomena occur in children with high fevers. Muscle
spasms and unconsciousness typify a type of this phenomenon known as grand mal. For the
point, name these convulsion events, the defining characteristic of epilepsy.

ANSWER: Seizures (accept specific seizure types like Grand Mal Seizure before mentioned;
prompt on "Convulsions")

(3)     This class of animals vocalizes through the use of a syrinx which can produce
especially variable sounds in mynahs and conures. Members of this class of animals have
four-chambered hearts and, though warm-blooded, are descended from dinosaurs. For the
point, name this general class of vertebrates whose bones are typically hollow to enable flight.

ANSWER: Birds (or Avians; or Aves; accept Mynah Birds; accept Conure Birds)

(4)     This U.S. state is home to the Hale Telescope, which was the world's largest when it
was constructed at this state's Palomar Observatory. Ernest Lawrence invented the cyclotron
at a university in this state that won a Nobel Prize for discovering plutonium and uranium
under Glenn Seaborg. For the point, identify this U.S. state where Berkelium and a namesake
element were discovered.

ANSWER: California

(5)     This element's methyl compounds bio-accumulate in fish and other seafood.
Atmospheric pressure can be measured in millimeters of this element, and alloys of this
element are commonly known as amalgams. Remaining liquid at room temperature this is,
for the point, what transition metal that has largely been replaced by colored alcohol in glass
thermometers?

ANSWER: Mercury (or Hg; accept Mercury Methyl Compounds; accept Millimeters of
Mercury)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                             Round 3


(6)    This person recorded their best known achievement in the journal 20 Hrs., 40 Min..
This person is the namesake of the scholarship fund awarded by a women's organization
known as the Ninety-Nines. This person was last seen traveling from New Guinea with
navigator Fred Noonan. For the point, name this female aviator who disappeared in 1937.

ANSWER: Amelia Mary Earhart

(7)     This molecule is silenced by proteins in the Argonaute family. Micro and small
interfering variants of this molecule are noncoding, and one type of this molecule links amino
acids to form proteins. Ribosomal, messenger, and transfer are types of, for the point, what
single-stranded nucleic acid that does not contain deoxyribose?

ANSWER: RNA (or Ribonucleic Acid; accept RNA Interference or miRNA or siRNA or
microRNA or Small Interfering RNA or rRNA or tRNA or mRNA or Ribosomal RNA or
Transfer RNA or Messenger RNA)

(8)    The positive displacement type of these devices continuously trap and move small
amounts of fluids. The diaphragm type of these devices alternates fluid motion between two
chambers separated by a flexible rubber seal. Pressure is reduced in the vacuum type of these
devices, and reciprocal examples of these devices power hand-operated wells. For the point,
name these devices used to inflate tires.

ANSWER: Pump (accept Positive Displacement Pump; accept Diaphragm Pump; accept
Vacuum Pump; accept Reciprocating Pump; accept Tire Pump)

(9)     Instabilities in these objects can become swing-amplified, and these objects may be
formed via Lindblad resonances. One type of these objects has a flattened rotation curve and
appears in the upper part of the Hubble tuning fork. Spiral, elliptical, and irregular are major
types of, for the point, what type of galactic objects exemplified by Andromeda and the Milky
Way?

ANSWER: Galaxy (or Galaxies; accept specific types of Galaxies before mentioned)

(10) This man’s namesake transformation converts between coordinate systems that
differ only by relative motion. This scientist was the first to formalize the concept of inertia,
and he is famous for making discoveries that supported Copernicus’s heliocentric theory. For
the point, name this Italian polymath who improved the telescope.

ANSWER: Galileo Galilei (accept either; accept Galilean Invariance; accept Galilean
Transformation; accept Galilean Moons)

(11) This molecule and water are produced in the Sabatier process, and this molecule and
carbon dioxide are the main components of biogas [[BIO-gas]]. This molecule is the main
constituent of natural gas, and it is emitted from volcanoes and swamps. For the point,
identify this simplest alkane with formula CH4.

ANSWER: Methane (accept CH4 before mentioned)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                               Round 3


(12) The constellation Sagittarius is identified by this number in the Messier catalogue.
This number is the smallest even two-digit number whose digits sum to 10. This number is
the atomic number of Nickel, as well as the number of days in two fortnights. For the point,
identify this number, the product of 4 times 7.

ANSWER: 28

(13) Serum is a colorless component of this substance. An inability of the body to perform
that process within this substance can result in hemophilia. Clotting is a process that takes
place in, for the point, what substance within the human body composed of cells and plasma
that is classified in types such as O negative?

ANSWER: Blood (accept Blood Clot; accept Blood Type)

(14) Neurobiological models of these phenomena include the activation-synthesis, and
control is maintained in the lucid type of these phenomena. Sigmund Freud divided these
occurrences into manifest and latent content in a book titled for their interpretation.
Associated with REM sleep, these are, for the point, what nighttime occurrences, terrifying
varieties of which are called nightmares?

ANSWER: Dreams (accept Nightmares before read)

(15) The Cassini-Huygens [[HOY-genz]] space-research mission discovered many of its
physical features, including the String of Pearls and Great White Spot. The second-largest
moon of this planet is called Rhea, and other moons of this planet include Enceladus. Titan is
the largest moon of, for the point, what sixth planet from the Sun, located between Jupiter
and Uranus?

ANSWER: Saturn

(16) The shell model of this structure predicts islands of stability in isotopes with large
magic numbers that have a higher average binding energy. A famous experiment discovered
this structure by firing alpha particles at a sheet of gold foil. For the point, name this structure
at the center of the atom.

ANSWER: Atomic Nucleus (or Atomic Nuclei)

(17) One of these products invented by Alexey Pajitnov is sometimes used to disrupt visual
memory. Congressional hearings concerning these objects questioned whether they cause
children to engage in violence, and these products are given ratings based on their content
by the ESRB. For the point, name these entertainment products produced by companies such
as EA and Nintendo.

ANSWER: Video Games (prompt on "Games")
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                              Round 3


(18) Archimedes explained this natural phenomenon using the center of mass of a triangle.
Vitruvius explained this naturally occurring phenomenon by publishing De Architectura, and
Galileo Galilei apocryphally demonstrated this natural phenomenon by dropping two balls
from the same height. For the point, name this natural force that explains why objects fall.

ANSWER: Gravity (or Gravitation; or G)

(19) German shelters called schneekragens [[SHNEEK-rah-gins]] guard against these
phenomena by offering safe corridors. Terrain, weather, and packing of a certain material are
part of a three-part model of this phenomenon that can occur in slab and powder types. Loud
noises and other disturbances can trigger, for the point, what destructive natural
phenomenon also called a snow slide?

ANSWER: Avalanches (accept Slab Avalanche; accept Powder Snow Avalanche; accept
Snow Slide before mentioned)

(20) A condition affecting this organ is named for physician Norman Barrett. Another
condition of this organ can be prevented with H2 receptor or proton pump inhibitors and by
avoiding spicy foods. Stomach acid enters this organ in acid reflux and GERD [[GURD]]. For
the point, identify this tubular organ that transports food from the mouth to the stomach.

ANSWER: Esophagus

(21) The boundary between part of this region and its upper neighbor is sometimes named
for Keith Bullen or Inge Lehmann. Analysis of seismic waves and the magnetic field have
determined the outer portion of this layer is likely a solid ball composed of a nickel-iron alloy.
For the point, identify this innermost geologic layer of Earth.

ANSWER: Earth's Core (accept Inner Core; accept Outer Core)

(22) One of these animals orbited the Earth aboard Sputnik 2, becoming the first animal in
space. These animals were the subject of an experiment in which they developed an
association between meat powder and a ringing bell that resulted in their salivation. Ivan
Pavlov studied, for the point, what domestic animals that belong to the canine family?

ANSWER: Dogs (accept Canines or Canids before mentioned; accept Laika; accept Pavlov's
Dogs)

(23) This substance is the primary prolactin inhibitory factor, and this substance is broken
down by monoamine oxidase. Most production of this substance occurs in the substantia
nigra, and this neurotransmitter is under-produced in Parkinson’s disease. For the point,
name this neurotransmitter that is central to the brain’s pleasure and reward systems.

ANSWER: Dopamine
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                            Round 3


(24) One of these structures was subject to a stress test at its opening by a team of
elephants led by P.T. Barnum. A poorly designed one of these structures nicknamed Galloping
Gertie collapsed due to failure caused by resonance. Cantilever and suspension, are types of,
for the point, what structures that Roman engineers designed to span the Danube and Tiber
Rivers?

ANSWER: Bridges (accept Cantilevered Bridges; accept Suspension Bridges)

(25) This planet’s orbit marks the outer limit of the asteroid belt. An Italian scientist
discovered four moons of this planet in the 17th century, including Ganymede and Europa.
Galileo built a telescope to observe this planet, which is known for its Great Red Spot. For the
point, name this fifth planet from the sun, the largest in the solar system.

ANSWER: Jupiter

(26) Temperature increases with elevation in this layer of the atmosphere until its upper
boundary, where the ozone layer can be found. In this layer of the atmosphere, certain cirrus
clouds can occur above the tropopause. For the point, name this atmospheric layer where U2
spy planes have operated for decades and from which the extreme sport athlete Felix
Baumgartner jumped and survived.

ANSWER: Stratosphere

(27) The cirque and valley-head are types of these formations. Ridges protruding from
these formations are called nunataks, and the thermal state of these formations makes them
either temperate or polar. These formations move via basal sliding, and their leftover
deposits are called eskers. For the point, identify these slow-moving formations of ice.

ANSWER: Glaciers

(28) This phenomenon is usually accompanied by eastern movement of atmospheric
convection. This weather pattern is the warm phase of a southern oscillation named for it,
and it is responsible for the seasonal rise of ocean temperatures. For the point, identify this
warm weather pattern, which is contrasted with La Niña and named for the Spanish for "the
boy."

ANSWER: El Niño (or El Nino-Southern Oscillation; or ENSO)

(29) A form of this process on the planet Venus resulted in an atmosphere of 96% carbon
dioxide. The opposite of this process has been observed on Titan, where the moon’s surface
temperature is reduced by 9 degrees Kelvin. For the point, name this effect by which
atmospheric radiation warms the surface of the planet by trapping the sun's heat.

ANSWER: Greenhouse Effect
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                          Round 3


(30) An experiment on these subjects utilized a checkered carpet, a transparent glass table,
and a ramp. That Visual Cliff experiment was conducted on these subjects, and another
researcher hid toys from these subjects using a blanket to demonstrate their lack of object
permanence. For the point, name these young humans used as research subjects by
developmental psychologists.

ANSWER: Babies (or Infants; prompt on "Children" or similar answers)

Extra Questions
(1)     This quantity is the time integral of the impulse, and Coulomb’s law states that one
type of this quantity between two objects is inversely proportional to their distance squared.
This vector quantity is equal to mass times acceleration, according to Newton’s second law of
motion. For the point, name this vector quantity, examples of which include pushes and pulls.

ANSWER: Force (or F; accept Gravity or Gravitational force; accept Electrostatic force;
prompt on “electric”)

(2)    An object known as SN 1604 is named after this man, who described it in his De Stella
Nova. Astronomiae Pars Optica is a work by this scientist who wrote an essay to Ferdinand II
in which he proposed a force-based theory of lunar motion. For the point, name this polymath
who published three laws of planetary motion.

ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                            Finals



Finals
Regulation Tossups
(1)    Resacas are types of these features that are formed when water moves from the
Colorado River to the Gulf of Mexico. These features can release lethal amounts of carbon
dioxide in events known as limnic eruptions. Billabong is the Australian term for one of the
oxbow types of these bodies of water. For the point, name these bodies of water that include
Okeechobee and Huron.

ANSWER: Lakes (accept Oxbow Lakes; accept Billabong before mentioned; accept specific
lakes; prompt on "Limnic Eruption" before mentioned)

(2)     Enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of this molecule by dephosphorylation are
known as its namesake “ase.” This molecule must bind to a magnesium cation to be active,
and this molecule’s synthase is powered by a proton gradient in the electron transport chain.
Glycolysis yields a net gain of 2 of, for the point, what molecule, the energy currency of the
cell?

ANSWER: ATP (or Adenosine Triphosphate)

(3)     These constructs are unrolled during compilation, and vectorization obviates the
need for these constructs. Retry statements can be used to exit these structures using the
break command. For, while, and do are keywords that declare these constructs, which can
run infinitely if left unsatisfied. For the point, name these blocks of code that are executed
repeatedly until a particular condition is met.

ANSWER: Loops

(4)     In standard procedures, a sterile loop is spread over one of these objects containing
solid nutrient agar or another growth medium. Penicillin was discovered by Alexander
Fleming from a type of mold growing in one of these objects. Cells can be cultured on, for the
point, what shallow dishes named for a German microbiologist?

ANSWER: Petri dishes (accept plates; accept Petri plate)

(5)     The alpine form of this biome can be identified by the presence of stunted forests
called Krummholz. Short growing seasons affect this biome where the Sami people of Finland
reside. Animals native to this biome include the ptarmigan and lemming. For the point,
identify this biome characterized by low temperatures and limited tree growth that contains
permafrost in its Arctic example.

ANSWER: Tundra (accept Alpine Tundra; accept Arctic Tundra before mentioned; accept
Antarctic Tundra)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                               Finals


(6)     In most oocytes, these structures can be seen in their "lampbrush" form. In humans,
these structures are numbered roughly in order of descending length, and two of them are
the "Sex" type. Karyotypes are used to arrange and display these structures made of
chromatin. Human genetic information is carried by, for the point, what cells that generally
have 23 pairs?

ANSWER: Chromosomes (accept Lampbrush Chromosomes; accept Sex Chromosomes)

(7)     The Tupolev Tu-144 is the Soviet analog of a type of aircraft that can accomplish this
feat, and that aircraft, the Concorde, was primarily operated by Air France and British
Airways for three-hour transatlantic flights to New York. Chuck Yeager flew in an X-1 rocket
plane to accomplish, for the point, what feat in which a vehicle travels faster than Mach 1?

ANSWER: Breaking the Sound Barrier (accept Breaking Mach 1; accept Supersonic;
accept Concorde before mentioned)

(8)    These structures are numbered based on the thoracic vertebra to which they attach.
The lowermost of these structures are known as the floating type, and the false type of these
structures are connected via cartilage to the sternum. For the point, identify this set of 12
paired bones that form a namesake cage in the chest.

ANSWER: Ribs (accept True Ribs; accept False Ribs; accept Floating Ribs)

(9)     Two enzymes and three of these compounds synthesize creatine. Residues of one type
of these compounds make up about one-third of collagen, and the side chain of that type of
these compounds is a single hydrogen atom. These compounds are the precursor to proteins,
and 21 of them are known. For the point, identify these compounds of which methionine and
lysine are essential types.

ANSWER: Amino Acids (prompt on partial answers; accept Glycine)

(10) The conservation of this quantity can be derived from Noether’s [[NOY-thurrs]]
theorem for systems that possess time invariance. The Lagrangian is the difference between
the kinetic and potential types of this quantity. The joule is the SI unit that measures, for the
point, what quantity that is needed in order to do work?

ANSWER: Energy (or Total Energy; accept Kinetic Energy; accept Potential Energy or any
other specific type of energy)

(11) This odd number is followed by twin primes, and this perfect square is the second in
a series of squares whose digits add up to 18. This first reverse divisible number is often the
basis for numerical magic tricks because it can be the result of any two three-digit numbers,
reversed then subtracted. For the point, what is the product of 3 and 11?

ANSWER: 33
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                              Finals


(12) One of these creatures is biologically immortal due to its ability to alternate between
its polyp and medusa phases. These creatures possess structures called nematocysts, or
stinging cells. The lion's mane species of these creatures is the largest member of the phylum
cnidaria [[NYE-dare-ee-uh]]. For the point, name these venomous aquatic animals that
include the Portuguese Man O' War.

ANSWER: Jellyfish (accept Cnidarians before mentioned; accept specific Jellyfish species)

(13) Some compounds composed of these molecules have a lattice energy that can be
measured via applications of Hess’s law, and they are held together by electrostatic
attractions. A covalent bond unites atoms in the polyatomic type of these molecules. For the
point, name these charged molecules that can be either cations [[CAT-"eye"-ons]] or anions.

ANSWER: Ions (accept Ionic Compounds; accept Cation or Anions before mentioned)

(14) This type of electromagnetic radiation is utilized in Mossbauer spectroscopy, and
bursts of this type of radiation last briefly before emitting radiation of a longer wavelength,
such as X-rays. For the point, name this type of radiation that has the shortest wavelength on
the electromagnetic spectrum and can be produced by nuclear fission.

ANSWER: Gamma Rays (accept Gamma Ray Burst; accept Terrestrial Gamma Ray Flash)

(15) The sarcoplasmic type of this organelle releases calcium ions during muscle
contraction. It’s not the Golgi apparatus, but flattened sacs called cisternae are found in this
organelle. This organelle folds proteins, and its types are distinguished by the presence or
absence of studded ribosomes. For the point, name this organelle that comes in smooth and
rough types.

ANSWER: Endoplasmic Reticulum (or ER; accept Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum or ER;
accept Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum or ER; prompt on “Reticulum” or “Endoplasmic”)

(16) This molecule is phosphorylated by hexokinase in the first step of its conversion to
pyruvate. Formation of this molecule requires six carbon dioxide molecules and six water
molecules, and cellulose is composed of units of this most abundant monosaccharide. For the
point, name this six-carbon molecule, the main component of blood sugar.

ANSWER: Glucose

(17) The namesake load of these devices can be found by dividing charge by voltage. These
devices can be created by inserting a resistive dielectric between two parallel plates, and
these devices' namesake quantity is measured in farads. For the point, name these circuit
components that passively hold an electric charge.

ANSWER: Capacitors
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                               Finals


(18) Flank vents are peripherals to this type of landform that may form from a cinder cone.
Calderas are formed on these landforms as the result of the collapse of a magma chamber.
For the point, name these landforms that are prone to eruption and include examples such as
Mt. Saint Helens.

ANSWER: Volcano (accept Caldera before mentioned; accept specific types of Volcano)

(19) This organ is located at the end of the cecum, which is located at the beginning of the
large intestine. This hollow tube is closed on one end and is believed to be vestigial in humans.
For the point, name this organ which cab be easily removed to relieve its namesake
inflammation due to having no currently known life-sustaining function.

ANSWER: Appendix

(20) Some of the largest types of features made from this natural material include
Christmas Island. Islands formed from this material comprise the countries of Tuvalu and
Kiribati [[KEER-uh-bahs]], and this material also comprises the world's largest structure
made by living organisms. For the point, name this material that forms the Great Barrier Reef.

ANSWER: Coral (accept Coral Atolls; prompt on "Great Barrier Reef" until mentioned)

(21) The crusts of these objects are subject to frame dragging and strong magnetic dipole
rotation that can cause starquakes. When these objects possess extreme magnetic fields they
are called magnetars, and when these objects emit regular bursts of radiation they are known
as pulsars. For the point, name these extremely dense stars composed of a namesake neutral
particle.

ANSWER: Neutron Stars (accept Pulsars before mentioned)

(22) This largely spherical body's highest point is the cryo-volcano Ahuna Mons. Along
with Uranus, this body's orbit was predicted by the discredited Titius-Bode Law. Vesta and
this body were the destinations of the Dawn probe, and this body is the only dwarf planet
within Neptune's orbit. For the point, name this largest object in the asteroid belt.

ANSWER: Ceres

(23) This number that was estimated in the Buffon's needle problem appears as one of the
two exponents in Euler's [[OY-luhrs]] identity. 180 degrees equals this number of radians,
and twice the product of the radius and this number helps compute the circumference of a
circle. For the point, give this number approximately equal to 22 over 7, or 3.14.

ANSWER: Pi (accept 3.14 before mentioned; accept Archimedes' Constant)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                              Finals


(24) The Hartree-Fock method is a process for approximating these entities of more
complex systems. The molecular variety of these entities can be calculated from the LCAO
method. The simplest type of these entities is spherical and contains no radial nodes, and a
singular one of these constructs can only hold two electrons. For the point, name these atomic
regions that come in s, p, d, and f varieties.

ANSWER: Orbitals (accept Wavefunctions before “Molecular” is mentioned; accept specific
orbital types such as S, P, D, or F Orbitals before mentioned)

(25) The side lengths and diagonals of one type of these shapes can be related by Ptolemy’s
theorem. Points within the plane that form the cyclic type of these shapes must satisfy the
intersecting chords theorem. Tetragon is another name for these types of shapes whose
simple or planar forms must have interior angles that sum to 360 degrees. For the point, name
these four-sided polygons.

ANSWER: Quadrilaterals

(26) Hygrometers are used to measure this property which can be reduced or maintained
using air-conditioner devices. High levels of this property reduce the rate of heat evaporation
from skin surfaces. For the point, name this property found in high levels in tropical countries
that measures the concentration of water vapor in the air.

ANSWER: Humidity

(27) One type of military technology named for this civilization was introduced in a
"Double piston pump" variety. That early flamethrower was a type of "Fire" named for this
civilization that invented the clepsydra, a type of automated water clock. For the point,
identify this civilization that made advancements in medicine thanks to Hipppocrates.

ANSWER: Greece (accept Greek or Greeks; accept Hellenic Republic; accept Elliniki
Dimokratia; accept Ellas or Ellada)

(28) Most of these objects are classified as chondrites, and these objects concentrate in the
Transantarctic Mountains after striking glaciers. Particularly bright examples of these objects
are known as bolides, but they get another name after striking the ground. Found inside
impact craters, these are, for the point, what fallen space rocks?

ANSWER: Meteorites (prompt on “Asteroids;” prompt on "Meteoroids")

(29) A project called Breakthrough Starshot aims to send many miniature spacecraft to
this system using solar sails to explore this star system, the brightest object in the
constellation Centaurus. Comprised of three stars, this is, for the point, what closest stellar
system to our Sun which contains a star known as Proxima?

ANSWER: Alpha Centauri (prompt on "Proxima Centauri" before mentioned)
2021-22 MS Science Bee 1 V (7) - 2022-03-31                                             Finals


(30) This element forms a structural motif in DNA domains known as its namesake
“finger." This element is commonly used to galvanize iron and steel against corrosion in heavy
industry. This element’s alloy with copper is brass, and it is the main component of pennies.
Ointments and sunscreen commonly use an oxide of, for the point, what metal with symbol
Zn?

ANSWER: Zinc (accept Zn before mentioned; accept Zinc Finger)

Extra Questions
(1)     A single bond between two atoms of this element is present in molecules used to
catalyze radical reactions. Another molecule with three atoms of this element is present in
the stratosphere to absorb UV light. In respiration, a diatomic molecule of this element is
exchanged for carbon dioxide. For the point, name this element with atomic number 8 and
symbol O.

ANSWER: Oxygen (prompt on "Peroxide;" prompt on "Ozone")

(2)     It’s not the Earth, but scientists estimate this body formed 4.6 billion years ago from
the gravitational collapse of matter. Copernicus first advanced the theory that the planets
don’t orbit Earth, but rather this object, the nearest star to Earth. For the point, name this
massive body at the center of the solar system.

ANSWER: Sun (accept Sol)
